 Birmingham Daily Post - Tuesday 18 May 1886 p.4



MR. WILLIAM MORRIS ON " THE POLITIOAL OUTLOOK." Last night a lecture was
delivered' in the Exchange Robms, New Street, under the auspices of the
Birmingham Branch of the Socialist League, by Mr. William Morris, on !'The
Political Outloolr." Mr. T. F. Walker presided, and there was a large
attendance-Mr. M ORRItts, who was received with applause, said that the
political outlook from a mere party point of view was at the present moment
very exciting. His view of the- Irish question was the commonsense one, that
if a country felt itself to be a country, and felt its capacity for govern- I
leg itself, then it was to the advantage of the whole world that it should
govern itself. (Applause.) As fir as he knew the Irish people, they appeared
to him to be quick witted and sensible, and really not behind any other people
in their appreciation of what their own interests were. He believed that the
mere sentiment of I ifationalism would disappear when they had the actual I
fact of Home Rule-that was to say, when they felt themn- selves under the
responsibility of dealing witll all difficul- I ties that they undoubtedly
would have to face from the very first, They wished to get rid of arbitrary
authority and compulsion. Some of his friends wers surprised that I he should
take a part in politics, and he admitted that I pblitics were a record of the
crudest blunders and follies of mankind. (Hear, hear.) But it was necessary
that Socialists should be political in a practical sense, and they recognised
the fact by calling themselves revolutionary. It was their business as
revolutionary, political. or practical Socialists to educate the people out of
their position as obstructionists to progress. True Socialists had nothing to
do with mixing themselves up with Parliamentary squabbles, but it would be a
mistake not to watch the signs of the times, Parliament was looked upon as a
means by which social change should be effected, but Parliament was always
miles and miles behind the general body of the country, as they would see in
the coarse of a week, (Laughter and applause.) It was many years since the
democracy seemed to be on the verge of that complete triumph, the rdalisation
of' which made some people terrified. People could not quite believe in the
clean sweep, during the last fifty years, commercial prosperity had made of
the old feudal system, The old idea of democracy, however, had fallen away,
and the attack had now beconme an attack on the sanctity of pro- perty. At the
general election there were hints of Socialism -made familiar by a very
familiar name in Birmingham -which. very naturally attracted the bulk of the
field labourers. People might be sure that the field labourers would be by no
means satisfied with being enfranchised. They had vague ideas that besides
being enfranchised they wanted to be free. The " three acres and a cow" was a
sort of myth, he supposed: but like many other myths, it had a considerable
meaning behind it. The field labourers exp6stedverynmateriallbenefitto result
?? party which they helped to put into power. In short, it seemed that doing
the general election the candidates found the words and the field labourers
the meaning of them, which was that they were to derive some advantage at the
expense of their masters. (Laughter,) He did not know what they would think
when they found that their representatives did not mean that they should be
advantaged at the expense of their masters. He alluded to the land question in
Ireland, remarking that tlhe sanctity of property was threatened by the claim
for Home Rule; and then referred to the various sections of the Liberal narty,
remarking that the present time for agitation for reform by Parliamentary and
constitutional means would, it seemed to him, be wholly in the hands of thes
moderate or reactionary party, which would attract to it all men who desired
stability of things as they were-even many of those who now posed as
progressive and truly Liberal persons in Parliament. Those who were the
progressive party would partly fall off from timidity and corruption, and the
rest would be defeated and driven into the as s of those who refused to meddle
with reform, and would be declared revolutionaries. How the revolution would
be accomplished it was im- possible to say, but if they were to make Up their
minds, they would not suffer themselves to be turned into maaelsines. They
would thereby tdefeat the schemes of those who insisted in living on their
labour, and the world would become, at any rate, so far better, and a fair
chance would be given to everyone to work, live, and be happy,
(Applause.)-Several questions were answered by Mr. Morris; and the proceedings
terminated with the usual votes of thanks,
