 Cambridge Chronicle and Journal - Saturday 23 February 1878 p. 4-5



At the annual presentation of prizes to the successful pupils of the School of Art, in the small room at te Guildhall on Thursday evening, in the presence of a large number of ladies and gentlemen.


Mr. W. Morris addressed the meeting as follows:-

In these days, when even those of us who love art most are apt sometimes to be
discouraged by the carelessness for art that surrounds us, it is not wonderful
that people should ask, some in triumph and some in sorrow, is the desire for
beauty, and eventfulness[?] of form that produces art, an essential part of
man's nature? or is it only one of the fleeting outcomes of the necessary
energy of life, like many another fashion that has now passed away for ever?
That is an anxious question for you and me, whose livesare being spent now in
dealing with that art. For indeed, I conceive that, to put it in another way,
it means, are we merely trifling over the cast-off hobbies of former ages, and
weakly trying to spin out the time a little before all these toys are looked
upon with clear eyes and proced at their proper value; or are we working
diligently, looking backward with gratitude and forward with hope, expecting
while we toil to see some glimmer of the new light beginning to shine upon
neglected art, on the creative powers of man, that as in the latter days shone
so fully on science, on man's analytical powers. I say it is a most serious
question to us, whether are has become a mere rag of past history or is still a
living fibre of our present days. For if we must say yes to the first part of
the question, then we artists are wasting our time, or worse; we by our
trifling are helping to make the age effeminate and trifling and we had better
at once make an end of what we call art and hope to see some new thing take the
place of it. And now I must say that the very fact that such a question can be
put by any one that loves the Art, is a sign that some great change is a t work
in these matters. Who could have thought of such a thing once except a few
devotees or grumbling philosophers, with whose contempt of Art, indeed, I
imagine there was mingled not a little affectation. The most of men worked on,
letting their hands follow the instinct of their brains, and producing abundant
beauty either simple even to childishness, or sublime and mighty, according to
the measure of the mind that guided their hands. There has been accomplished
all that great body of Art that we in these latter days have the pleasure and
advantage of studying, if we have no other pleasure and advantage, it rose from
mere barbarism, how or where we know not: it changed, it wavered, grew faint,
rose up again, lost on one side, gained on the other, fitted itself to all
races all creeds, and th[r]ough everything was still the same Art, with one
unbroken though varying life. Where is this art now? Where is the life of so
many thousand years? Has it died out?  And if so, can the dead live again?
Indeed, in appearance, I should say it has died; or rather, we must at least
say that the link that binds the imitative conscious art of today with that
progressive unconscious art of the past is hard to find, if indeed it can be
found at all. Yet somehow we artists must find it if we are not to call
ourselves triflers over effete rubbish, even as I said before. If you are
astonished at my taking what must at first seem such a gloomy view of art, I
can only say many people, I know, think or rather feel that that link is clean
lost. I am forced to say that beyond a very small circle now-a-days, I find
people living in a world that does not know art at all. For the most part even
highly cultivated people eager for the good of the world with all kinds of
sensitiveness, nevertheless are utterly blind on this side of things.
True,they may think it necessary or rather desirable that something should be
known of art as a matter of education, but they would not miss it if it were to
disappear; they do not really care about it at all; they will live amidst the
most frightful ugliness quite blandly and happily: though some of them, at
least, make a profession of loving the country, the mountains, the sea, and so
on, all the things that inspire art in those that produce it. I say "make a
profession to do so," since I rather more than suspect they are not a little
blunt to these impressions also. This, I am sure, can never have been the case
in those past times I have been talking of, and it isa puzzle to me, how it can
be now. A puzzle to me in one way: yet in another way I must acknowledge the
justice of it, yes and rejoice in it even. I say I must rejoice in it when I
think of the mass of squalor and misery, the unhelped and apparently unhelpable
hidesousness, which surrounds the greater part of our big towns. I should doubt
the existence of any possible justice in the world if while 999 thousandths of
the people, say, of London, are living in such a state that it is impossible
for them to have any idea of beauty at all, the thousandth part were not
oppressed by the mere brutality, unconsciously if they did not share it, as
they verily do. For I declare to you that though in this as in all else the
rich have the advantage over the poor, the advantage in matters of tast, in
appreciation of and longing for beauty, I would rather say, is but small.
Glitter show and vulgarity are copiously paid for by the rich.  Into such
strange byways of folly has civilization strayed at whiles. I must ask you not
to think that I am wandering from the point, for let us consider.  These
unconscious artists of past days were thinking of something more than art when
they wrought wonders that we rejoice in. They were earning their bread, they
were glorifying their creeds, they were struggling with difficult and intricate
prices [?] of knowledge while they wrought them. Their life was in those works
of art and showed them in their ways of life. But with us the life of our great
cities, the places, you understand, in which the arts must always mostly
flourish, is so distasteful and disgusting to every man - I will not say of
taste, but of heart rather,- that we who work in the arts cannot by any means
help striving to escape from all that into some unreal world, in which nothing
but art exists; and the result is that all we do is weak, isolated, wanting in
abundance and spontaneity. Now I do not stand before you as a mere praiser of
past time. I also know the injustice, the ignorance, the violence, and
unreasoning passion of those past ages. I know what the world has won since
then. But I ask what it seems to have lost. Has it lost it past recovery?  My
discontent of the present of art is bred by the hope of its future. I am
speaking [of hardly] [so hardly of ?] what we do, not for our discouragement,
but for our encouragement. For, look you; the arts have gone so far in one
direction as they possibly can go: say 300 years ago it had come to that at
last. Then people tried to push it further in the same direction, and failed,
as might have been expected. Hence three centuries of trifling, of eclipse, and
neglect of the arts coinciding with the enormous increase of riches and
consequent luxury, which has been, is, and will be, I most solemnly affirm, the
very bane of all the arts. I say the arts have gone as far as they can go in
one direction. By some means or other new scope, new life, must be found for
them. Go into our museums, and look at the works tere, and if you mean
imitation you will despair if you know anything about the matter; so complete,
so miraculous you will find them. But if you are looking for instruction, if
you are seeking insight, you will hope and rejoice rather at the sight of that
unapproachable excellence. Thinking the mind of man that brought such things to
pass is still alive in its vehement and partly successful struggles for other
good things, it has been blind to these hopes for a while, but when those
matters that it has of late desired have been some of them attained to, some of
them found out not to be desirable, the mind of man will again turn to the
embers still as I think kept alive from the old times of art; and will once
more carry on the torch to be a light and a glory to the world. Like enough the
youngest of us all will not live to see one of those new days, and yet I say
the ope of their coming even now makes me a part of them, even as memory makes
me a part of the great works of the past. For, indeed, I cannot seriously think
that anything can really permanently  take the place of art in men's minds,
whatever the seeming outlook may be. Nay, I affirm that looking all over the
world, looking at the decay of the East and the tumult of the West, secure as I
am that our present civilization in some form must needs be pushed on further
afield, so sure I am that elsewhere - yes, I will be bold to say it, especially
in brutal America, in brutal England, our civilization must needs be
re-civilized; nor do I think that anything but art can do it - I mean real
living art, springing as ancient art did from religion. I use that word in no
narrow sense, but in the widest imaginable sense, and again I say that in these
days our civilization halts and sickens, nay sometimes seems as if it would
take some steps on te backward path for lack of an art springing from pure and
simple ways of life from the exaltation of soul that comes from the constant
practice of courage, kindness, and good faith. Once more I say that whatever
reaction there may be, yet assuredly such art will arise, and in te meantime I
am sure also that our task, our pleasure of preparing the path for it, of
keeping alive the hope of it may well make for us artists a serious and
earnest, and not a trifling life. To you especially who are studying in this
school, I have but little advice to give that your own good sense would not
give. You know very well that nature can be your only final guide, your only
test of right and wrong. You know very well that as you work no diligence can
be too great for the sake of getting a thing right from the outset, that
shuffling and pretence will always find you out, and land you in discomfort and
waste of time. You know very well, and the more you know of art the more you
will know it, tat you cannot study the works of the past too much, always on
one condition, that you do it for the sake of study, not for the sake of
reproduction; for of course it is clear to you that no one can have any call to
be an artist, except in virtue of his being able to do someting that nobody
else can do. Even as in a wider scope it is with the arts. I mean that no words
can describe a picture, that no prose analysis can say what a poem means. I do
not mean by saying all this to discourage those of you who are studying for the
sake of educating yourselves to know and love beauty rather than for becoming
professional artists of any sort, still less those wo are or will one day be
artists of the lesser kind like myself, designers as they are called. What I
say is that humble a man's walk in te arts may be, any excellence he may be
capable of will come from some grain of originality in him, and on what side
that may lie he will find out by finding what he really likes, which is not as
easy a matter as it seems to be at first sight. Let me finish these few words
by praising the pleasures of an artist's life. Other people work hard and are
glad often I am afraid to shake off the thought of their work at the day's end
and forget it, nay often if they could and were free they would cose some other
work, or no work at all perhaps. But with us every day is a holiday, except
perhaps the days when we fail notably. We don't like to leave off at night, and
are in a hurry to begin in the morning. Now if we were the free-est and richest
people in the world would we lead any other life. I must ask the rest of you to
forgive me when I say that to be an artist or a handicraftsman seems to me to
be the only quite satisfactory way of living. Ah, sir, might it not come about
that by far the greater part of mankind had that happiness. It was so once.
Every handicrafstman was once an artist, and I must needs think that our
civilization has gone astray in this, that it is no longer so. And once again I
say without any condition, without any "if", that one day or other this will be
amended, and I call upon all you here present to consider this if tis is not
the great end of all instruction in the arts to make men's labour a pleasure to
them and a pleasure to tose for whom they labour. Nay, I think that it is a
very good work for us all to help in though we may be long in bringing any
great measure of it about, for it will be a changed world indeed and a world
that will have cured many and many an evil when every man's share of daily toil
is dignified with pleasure, good will, and hope.


