ART AND THE PEOPLE: A SOCIALIST'S PRO-
TEST AGAINST CAPITALIST BRUTALITY; AD-
DRESSED TO THE WORKING CLASSES (1883)

Fellow citizens,
I WISH to say a few plain words to you on the subject of
art; and since I address myself chiefly to those who are
called the working-classes, I know well that the plainer
those words are the better, since now for many years, for
centuries, the working-classes have scarcely been partakers
in art of any kind, and the phraseology of men learned in
the finearts will be strange to you. For centuries this slavery
has been added to the rest of the oppression under which
you lie, that you have been forbidden to have any share in
the intelligent production of beautiful things.

Indeed, I think it will be news to many of you who toil to
live that you may live to toil, thhat there either is or has been or
can be any connexion between Art and the People. It may
seem to you, I can well imagine, that art is concerned only
in making luxurious toys for rich and idle persons, and that
all the working-classes have to do with it, is that some of
them can earn their poor wages by working at it as ma-
chines work, without knowing or caring what they are
doing; while now and then on holidays those of them that
chance to think of it and who live in London may stray into
the National Gallery or the British Museum, and see the
carefully hoarded works of past ages, and get from them
such good as men can get who look on a book in an anti-
quated dialect of their language without an interpreter be-
tween them and the past.

And yet there is a phrase which of late has been much in
the mouths of those who have been thought to be interested
in the welfare of the Fine Arts; they have talked much of
Popular Art: what does that mean?

The words Popular Art, or Art of the People, have a
meaning you may be sure; the thing which they mean has
really existed, or you would have lttle to look at when you
stray into the National Gallery and the British Museum:
the Art of the People has in many places and in many times
solaced and sustained the people amidst their griefs and
troubles.

And a great gift an art seems to to me; an art made in-
telligently by the whole body of those who live by their
labour: instinct with ther thoughts and aspirations, mov-
ing whither they are moving, changing as they change, the
genuine expression of their sense of beauty and mystery
of life: an art born of their joy and outliving their sorrow,
though tinged by it: an art leaving to future ages living

witness of the existence of deft hands and eager minds not
too proud to tell us of their imperfect thoughts and their
glimpses of insight into wonders and terrors, as they passed
amid the hurry of their daily work through the sunshine
and the shadow of their lives.

This, I say, is the Art of the People, and on this is found-
ed all Art which is worth anything. I do not believe that
Art worthy of the name can long exist, unless it rests on
such a foundation: or if it can, if it really be that there can
be an art practised by and for a few well-to-do and rich
people, and founded on the slavery of the many, I for one
will have nought to do with it: to me it will be contemptible
and dishonourable, a rag of luxury and folly.

And yet, I must tell you that I am an artist: art is that by
which I live; it feeds me body and soul, and without it the
world would be empty to me: judge therefore how I must
love and long for the Art of the People! For with me it
comes to this, that I cannot live with any approach to hap-
piness without art forming part of my life, and I know that
my only chance of my having any real share in art, is that it
shall be the Art of the People: nay more, I know that what
art yet remains to us from the time when man had some
pleasure in his labour, is lessening day by day, and that
unless some change comes which will give all people a
share in art, there will soon be no art at all left in the world.
Judge therefore, I say, how I must love the Art of the
People!

And one thing I must tell you before I go further, that
this art is not a mere dream of something wwhich might have
been; as I have said it has in many times and places solaced
the lives of toiling men; and this I have noticed of the times
and places where it has flourished, that it has always been in
advance of the apparent progress of the times that produced
it. I have been astonished when I have looked into the
popular art of past ages to find work so refined and elegant
done in times so rude and rough: work bearing so many
tokens of quick wit and invention done in times so ignorant

and superstitious: works showing so many signs of free-
dom of thought and pleasure in life and external nature in
days which seem to us to have been so full of oppression,
gloom and turmoil; all these, mind you, qualities of hand
and soul which could not have been produced to the order
of rich men; for such qualities are spontaneous and cannot
be bought with money or compelled by power; in short, it is
not casy to exaggerate the contrast between the beauty and
thoughtfulness of the handicrafts of certain periods, and
the folly and disgrace of their history as otherwise told.
Can we wonder at this? That written history of ‘Kings and
Scoundrels'* is made up of the deeds of the greedy few rul-
ing arbitrarily; while the history of art is made up of the
deeds of the patient many living naturally.

The History of Art! what is that history indeed but the
history of the World, since it alone tells us of the deeds of
the people, and what they thought of and hoped for?
through this and this alone can we look upon times past as
they really were and see them alive.

And our own times, the days in which we live, how will
those come to know the story of our lives from day to day?
Well, when we are gone, and the 19th century has become
a mere part of the past history of the world people will stil
I suppose study history through the remains and records of
popular art, as they do now: but when they come to these
days and seek for evidence in their handiwork of the lives of
those who lived by their labour, they will be baulked and
have to stop short: they will perhaps find evidence of what
the upper and middle classes thought working men were
like left them in literature, chiefly novels; they will have
record more or less trustworthy of their efforts towards
political and social advancement; they will know that they
made and used certain machines, and that they drew such 

and such wages: they will in short know something of the
people as a political and commercial machine; but of the
real story of their lives and the daily labour which was so
great a part of them they will know nothing; a blank space
will be the history of the popular art of the 19th century.

To make sure that you do not misunderstand me, I will
state in the plainest words possible what seems to me to be
the condition of Art in civilized countries, and in what
proportions such art as there is, is shared amongst the
various classes of the community.

Now the fine arts must be divided into two classes or
kinds: the first what we may call the intellectual Arts, re-
presented by painting and sculpture, address themselves
wholly to the mind of man; they have no necessary con-
nexion with any articles of material use, I mean. It is con-
ceivable that a community might have all bodily necessaries,
comforts, luxuries even, and not know what painting and
sculpture meant: but besides these strictly intellectual Arts,
there is a large body of art (or the pretence of it) which
forms part of the matters of our daily life; our houses, our
furniture, our utensils for eating and drinking, and our
clothes are ornamented by this lesser kind of art, which
cannot be dissociated from the things which we use every
day: and this is commonly called decorative or ornamental
art. I must further explain that while nations and times
(though not many) have lacked the purely intellectual art,
no nation or time has ever consented to do without the
ornamental art; and lastly I must tell you that in all times
when the Arts were in a healthy condition there was an
intimate connexion between these two kinds of art; nay
moreover that in those times when art flourished most, the
higher and the lower kinds of art were divided from one
another by no hard and fast lines; the highest of the intel-
lectual art had ornamental character in it and appealed to
all men, and to all the faculties of a man; while the humblest
of the ornamental art shared in the meaning and deep feel-
ing of the intellectual; one melted into the other by scarce

perceptible gradations: or to put it into other words, the best
artist was a workman, the humblest workman was an artist.

Well, let us see how it fares with art to-day: those who
practise the purely intellectual arts, and who are technically
called ‘artists’ are all by virtue of their occupation conven-
tionally of the class of gentlemen, and many of them are
men of education from their youth up: it is nowise my
business here or elsewhere to criticize the works of these
men; but I think I may be allowed to say that they are really
subdivided into two classes, the first composed of men who
would in any age of the world have held a high place in their
art; the second composed of men who hold their present
position of gentlemen-artists either by the accident of
their birth, or by their possessing industry, business-
habits or such-like qualities out of all proportion to their
artistic gifts. The work which these latter produce seems to
me of little value to the world (though there is a thriving
market for it), and their position is neither dignified nor
wholesome; yet they are mostly not to be personally blamed
for it, since oftenest they have some gift for art though not
great ones, and would probably not have succeeded in any
other career; they are in fact good decorative workmen
spoiled by a system which urges them to worldly ambition;
in times when popular art was flourishing, and when one
man was apprenticed to an artist, just as another was to a
carpenter, they would have found their level, and in various
ways done useful though unambitious work.

Again as to that first class of artists, who worthily fill 
their place and make the world wealthier by their work, they 
are very few, and have won their matery over their craft
by dint of incredible toil, painstaking and anxiety: yet in 
spite of that, or perhaps because of it, they cannot help 
looking back with longing eyes toward the past times of art
when less labour produced greater results: for whatever
knowledge they may have of the older art, and its methods
of work, they are cut off from tradition, that wonderful
almost magical accumulation of the skill of ages, which

men find themselves sharers in almost without effort on
their part, and by which their toil of learning is so very
much diminished.

Furthermore these great artists, as they only hold on to
the past artificially and by effort, so also, and that is worse,
they fail to touch widely those who are living in the present
for as a body the whole public, Upper, Middle and Lower
classes, is ignorant of art: apart from the artists themselves
and those very few persons who have special gifts of sym-
pathy with them, there is no real knowledge of what art
means; nothing at the best save certain vague preposses-
sions, which are but the phantoms of that Tradition I have
spoken of, which once bound artist and public together.
Therefore the artists are obliged to express themselves, as it
were, in  language ‘not understanded of the people’: nor
is this their fault; if they were to try, as some think they
should, to meet the public half-way, and work in such a
manner as to satisfy only those prepossessions of men igno-
rant of art, they would be casting aside their special gifts,
and would become traitors to that cause of art which it is
their duty and glory to serve: they have no choice save to
do their own personal work without any hope of being
understood as things now are; to stand apart as possessors
of some sacred mystery, which, whatever happens, they
must at least do their best to guard : and by this isolation
their loss is great; great both to their own minds and to
the work they produce; and as to our loss, the loss of the
public, it is not easy to measure: for, you see, it comes to
this, if we are to consider the distribution of the great and
elevating intellectual pleasure of the enjoyment of the
higher arts, that only a very few among the most cultivated
classes can share in it.

But if it fares thus with that side of the arts which, de-
pending on individual genius, is only acted on indirectly by 
bad social conditions, what is likely to be the state of that
other side of the fine arts which is commonly called decora-
tive art; art which (or the pretence of which) is to be found
 
on nearly every piece of goods which is offered for sale?
How is it likely to be with this art which above all other
depends on the co-operation of men with each other?

Well I suppose there are many people who have not
realized the fact that such an art exists, or who have heard
that it ever did exist; and few indeed are those who con-
sider that this great body of art, which has in times past
had such a hold on the world, can now be worth the exercise
of the thoughts of serious people.

Such as these arts now are, this is the way in which they
are carried on; they are made by three sets of people, I
won't say working together, but rather jostling along to-
gether: the first link in the chain is the capitalist called the
manufacturer, a ridiculous misnomer since the word
ought to mean a man who makes things with his hands:
well he is by virtue of his position conventionally a gentle-
man, and often enough has received a liberal education;
but in spite of any education he may have received it is
rarely indeed that he takes any interest in the craft he is
supposed to direct, and rarer still that he troubles himself
on the quality of any ornament, i.e., art which may be in it
for its own sake: nay, if he be personally inclined to do so
his position would soon put a stopper on his wishes: he
has been created to ‘make a profit’ as 'tis called, i.e., to
accumulate money which he has not earned, and which
most people suppose tumbles mysteriously from the sky as
a heaven-sent blessing on capital; but which some of us,
who have not been content to accept the miracle, believe
really comes of the earnings of those who do labour with
their hands, and are called in the jargon of to-day ‘opera-
tives' not manufacturers. A good deal more could be said of
the manufacturer and his position, but at present I must
consider him only as the first link of the chain in the pro-
duction of popular art (so called) and from that point of
view all I need say of him is that he is and is compelled to
be quite careless of what art there may profess to be in the
wares he gets made. It will illustrate this side of the subject

if you think how many rich men there are who profess (no
doubt honestly) to be decply interested in art and litera-
ture; who read poems and such-like books, who further the
establishment of museums, who buy pictures for great
sums of money, and who nevertheless are actually engaged
in pushing on the degradation of art, because they are in a
position which forces on them the accumulation of money
as an imperative duty, not to be set aside by any considera-
tion: which money if they but knew it, is not theirs, but
has been forced by the screw of competition out of the
earnings of those who are, to speak bluntly, their slaves.

The second link in the chain of the system by which
industrial art is produced, is the body of men who go be-
tween capital and labour, as managers, foremen, and the
like; as far as the ornamenting of wares is concerned they
are represented by the designer, who is usually educated
technically but seldom liberally in the few cases in which
gentlemen-artists are employed in this intermediate posi-
tion, they know little or nothing of the way in which the
wares are made and have next to no communication with
the workman; but whatever the social position of the de-
signer may be as a factor in the production of art, he is
bound by the same necessity as the capitalist to consider
first of all the ‘making a profit,' and is also in most cases
only a superior slave to the operative-slave, and competes
for a bare existence like the latter.

As for the workman, the third link in the chain, I need
not waste many words on his share in the production of art;
when he has anything to do save to tend an automatic
machine, he has nevertheless no control over the design of
the art, or even over the way in which it is to be carried out;
he is only responsible for turning out his work rigidly to
pattern, is in fact a machine and nothing better.

Now at present I will not ask you workment whether you
are content to spend your working hours fulfilling the 
office of cog-wheels and cranks, but I will simply assert 
that under the system I have been speaking of it is impos-

sible to turn out art: you must take an artist’s word for that.

Let us look at the system again and summarize its beautiful
arrangements: I am supposing it, mind you, to be a system
for the production of art as it verily professes to be in some
degree in all cases, while sometimes it is supposed to be em-
ployed making wares which are pure works of art. This in
short is the system: at the head is a man who is absolutely
master of the production, who is forced by his position not
to heed whether what he produces is good or bad so long as
it sells at a profit: his will is carried one step further by sub-
ordinates who have to take care that the wares shall sell at a
profit and of nothing else; and finally the 'hands’ who
accomplish the will of the 'captain of labour' have one thing
only to do, to make their labour profitable—to their master.

What place can art have in such a system? How much
can people care about art who will put up with the products
of such a system?

But indeed whatever may be thought of the matter by a
public quite ignorant of art, the plain truth is that the sys-
tem does not intend to produce either art or anything else
which might add to the pleasure of lfe or its dignity: mak-
ing a profit out of the lives of the great masses of the
working-man is its sole aim.

Therefore the sad truth is that there is no popular art
to-day, no art which represents the feelings and aspirations
of the people at large, as for example the buildings of the
Middle Ages represented the feelings and aspirations of
the people, gentle and simple, lay and clerk, of that period.

This then is the condition of the fine arts under the rule
of Plutocracy: on the one side there remains of the higher
intellectual art, the work of poets, painters, and the like, a
very small remnant struggling amidst a thicket of pretence 
and imposture: this remnant is lofty in aim and is not with-
out special skill of its own; but it is quite unregarded by, 
indeed unknown to the people in general, and is but ill 
understoof even among the cultivated classes by all but a 
very few.
 
On the other side of what used to be popular art there
remains but a ghastly pretence of ornament which is no-
thing but a commercial imposture, or at best but a foolish
survival of a half-remembered habit.

That I say is all the art we have left us; we in the heyday
of civilization, we who, as many people confidently believe,
have at last perfected our social system, and arranged for it
to endure for ever in that perfect form.

Popular art is a thing the world once had and has now
lost: is the loss grievous or trivial?

I answer first by another question: Is it right that the
most of civilized men, all town-dwellers at least, should be
deprived of the sight of beautiful things? is it right that they
should, except on rare occasions, have to look on mere
squalid ugliness?

I do not think we can seriously argue that question:
consider what it means; loss of the sense of beauty. Indeed
you may say that people will get used to it and will not feel
it:alas! that is too true of this loss as of others. Think then
what follows! We shall no longer for one thing be able to
understand the meaning of the poets and great writers of
the world; their language will be dead to us. What would
be left to us indeed of all that makes life worth living?
What! shall man go on generation after generation gaining
fresh command over the powers of nature, gaining more
and more luxurious appliances for the comfort of the body,
yet generation after generation losing some portion of his
natural senses: that is, of his life and soul? Think of a race of
men whose eyes are only of use to serve them to carry their
food to their mouths without spilling it!

It is no idle fear that this may befal us; nay there are
plenty of such men already; and they may well say that if 
we are to live amidst of London as it is or amidst the
squalor of the manufacturing districts without any hope of 
bettering the state of things, if not for ourselves, yet at least
for our sons or our sons' sons, they may well say in this
hopeless case that they are happier than those who have still

kept their manlike senses: that it is better to be born blind.

A strange conclusion to come to if we must! A strange
outcome of the progress of the race, if that be so.

That nature should have led us on through her ever
varying moods and seasons of loveliness to desire beauty,
and then that our own greed and cowardice should spoil all
for us, even nature herself in the long run: if indeed it be
true as I hear all kinds of people asserting that it is, that the
inevitable destiny of the race of man will compel him to
cover the whole of the civilized world with places like Lon-
don or Manchester.

As for me I will say plainly that I can conceive of no
grater downfal to the hopes of civilzation than the ful-
fiIment of this so-called inevitable destiny would be: a
society replete with all material comforts but shorn of
man’s intellectual pleasures: in such cold words has one to
speak of the reduction of the world to something far below
a huge swine-stye; the grossest state of savagery which the
world has known would be better than that, for there was
hope in it; but no hope in the future which the present
system, the rule of plutocracy, would bring us to.

So I say that if the beauty which once surrounded the
daily life of man is to pass away for ever, the mere loss of
that beauty, of the reasonable pleasure of the eyes, would be
a grievous loss to the world: nay such a loss would be a sign
that either our ideas of the progress of the race were but a
fond dream from the first, or that progress has reached its
height and is now going down hill: that the decrepitude of
the race of man is beginning.

Where lies the hope with which we must answer this
terrible fear?

To my mind it is wrapped up in the answer to be made to
yet question which I must now ask: Is it right that
all men who make anything should be deprived of the plea-
sure of making beautiful things intelligently? Or, to put it
in other words, is it right that only a very few men should
have pleasure in their daily work?

I can easily suppose that it seems strange to most of you
tp hear that there can be pleasure in labour: and truly to
most men nowadays, even to most of those who are not
strictly of the working-classes there is no pleasure it yet
there are still a few men left whose lfe is spent in creating
beauty for the sake of the beauty, that is to say that their
work may give pleasure to themselves and others. Now
consider such work, think of the pleasure that lies in &
great picce of intellectual art, a picture, a poem or a piece of
music; the pleasure and elevation of soul which you receive
from it as you look or read or listen: think of this I say, and
I believe it will be as inconceivable to you as it is to me that
such work can be done without pleasure, that what it has
rejoiced you so to receive has been no joy, nothing but
wearinessfor the author, the inventor, to give.

People talk of the inspiration of a great author or a
great artist; not without reason I think; for to my mind that
inspiration means the hope and the fruition of pleasure
which fills  man as he receives from the minds of those who
came before him to give to his fellows now living and to
those that shall live.

Now further I assert tht some portion of this pleasure of
creation is felt by every man who duly makes anything for
the benefit of mankind: in which sentence you se there
lie two important claims for labour: the first that such
labour must be duly done; the second that it must be done
for the benefit of the commonwealth.

It must be duly done; there must be in it some of the
keen interest which every healthy man takes in healthy
life; and in order that there may be such interest, it must
have in it variety and hope besides that mysterious bodily
pleasure which goes with the deft exercise of the bodily
powers: the variety and hope that should go with all labour
are intimately connected with each other: for the hope
means hope of excellence, the hope of doing something
different from day to day; nay in the end, of doing some-
thing which no other man but the workman has yet
 
thought of in some respects at least:a piece of work so done,
you understand, is a work of art, and he who does it is an
artist, and only so done can any work that has any endu-
rance in it be done duly

But also not only must the work be done duly, but it
must be done for the benefit of the commonwealth:  when
done it must be worth the trouble and labour spent on it,
and when this claim is satisfied there is added self-respect
to the hope and variety which I have just claimed as due
to worthy labour: so that the pleasure which an artist, that
is a free workman, feels in his labour, is made up of these
three things, variety, hope of excellence and self-respect
and the feelings of those who receive his work with due
sympathy may be expressed by the corresponding words,
surprise, pleasure and gratitude: and, believe me, the
knowledge that one’s work will be so receive is a reward
which the greatest man cannot afford to fall short of, and
which the humblest cannot be deprived of without suffer-
ing grievous wrong.

But the workman of to-day is not free: he is during his
working hours at least the slave of a system of labour which
does not in the least concern itself with his pleasure in the
work: instead of the incitement of the hope of excellence
and the amusement of variety, it uses one goad to labour,
the fear of ruin and starvation: it says in plain terms:
“Do this work which blind chance has apportioned to you,
or else go to the workhouse or die.”

Who can wonder that all work which can be ill done is ill
done nowadays? it would be a more reasonable hope to
expect to find figs on thistles than to find art growing from
such a system.

For, moreover, those who have to work under the com-
pulsion of competitive commerce cannot comfort them-
selves by thinking tht suffer as they may they are suffering
for the benefit of the commonwealth. The system of competi-
tion which enslaves them has no such end in view as that:
it is but the hollowest pretence which professes to think

that the greater part of the wares made by modern com-
merce are of any use to the world; a professor of that system
will,if he says what he thinks, admit that speedlily enough:
ask him the end of commerce, and he will tell you, to find
occupation for people, to carry on the life of society.

But I will translate his speech and tell you what it means:
just this is the end of competitive commerce, the getting
people to live and breed in order that they may toil to go on
living and breeding and by their toil produce a profit for
certain people who call themselves masters: other things
may be good, says this gospel, but this thing is necessary,
that workmen should live and breed to produce a profit for
their masters: this makes the true greatness of a country,
this is prosperity, this is civilization.

Well, whatever names you may call it by, and I could find
different names from these, it is for this we have given up
art at least: and I who know what art means am not con-
tent with the sacrifice. But you, working men, of whom I
am to my measureless grief compelled to say that you do not
know what art means, I ask you to consider what has been
sacrificed along with art and as a part of it.

I have said that an artist, or free workman, works
amused by variety, cheered by hope of success and excel-
lence, and elevated by the sense of giving worthy gifts to
the world: how then does the slave of commerce work?
Does variety amuse him? What! with the pattern before
him with the invention of which he had nothing to do,
which he will vary at his peril: day by day and day by day
the same dull task, his only solace to think of something else
while it is going on? Good for him and us if his thought is of
why he is a slave.

Does the hope of excellence cheer him? nay he is not
asked, not allowed even, to excell: to turn the crank oftener
than his comrade, that is his excellence: good for him and 
for us if he refuses to do so. Or lastly, is he elevated by the
thought that he is giving worthy gifts to the world? What, 
when he scarcely knows what he is doing; or is he does

know, knows only too well what sort of a gift his master
(not he) is offering to the world—wares made to sell—let
the buyer find out what they are! let the 'hand' take care he
don’t put too much work in them, 'for the margin of profit
is narrow!'

The hope of the workman! what respectable hope has he
save by constant toil and by dismal thrift, the misery and
unmanliness of which I as an artist, and as one who enjoys
life, can at least guess at, by toil and thrift to cast aside his
craft and climb up the ladder into the class of petty capital-
ists; where he in his turn will make a profit from other
men’s labour, from other men's necessities and despair?
That is the hope held out to him as the glory of the gospel of
supply and demand, or in plainer English, the gospel of
Devil take the hindmost: for you know climbing up the
ladder means pulling two or three others off the rungs.

No, the work itself, the exercise of the craft (a word
which in our older tongue means power) offers no hope and
no pleasure to the workman. Yet note by far the greater
part of your waking hours are your working hours, that
the remnant of your lives is but made up of rests to enable
you to go on toiling: under the present plutocratic system
therefore the greater part of your lives will be passed in
shuffling off a wearisome burden day by day, which day by
day you must take up again. Is this a life for men to lead?
Can we believe that it is necessary that the vast majority of
men should live such a life? Is it necessary, that is, for most
men, to lead an unhappy life lit by no gleam of self-respect,
cheered by one hope only, the hope of shifting the burden
of unhappiness on to some one else's shoulders? Such is the
life to which plutocracy condemns you.

So therefore my position comes to this; that art once
common to the whole people has by the action of competi-
tive commerce been taken from all but the more cultivated
part of the well-to-do classes, and that as regards art this
injustice is gradually putting an end to all art even amongst
this limited class: while as regards the life of the people in

general, it has not only starved it of beauty, but has also
made almost all labour unhappy; that is to say, has cast a
burden of unhappiness on the lives of the great mass of
the people.

This evil I will not call the greatest of all the evils which
the careless pursuit of so-called civilization has brought on
the world, but will rather say that it does in itself include all
the evils born of that fearful recklessness. What then is the
remedy for it? I have just now denied that it was necessary
that man's labour should be unhappy: but I say most
solemnly that this unhappy labour is necessary to the
existence of the present system of competitive commerce,
on which modern society rests: I say that the whole struc-
ture of modern society rests on its power to compel the
mass of the people to work unhappily on pain of death by
starvation.

Unless this is changed utterly we may as well fold our
hands, and let things go as they will ; that is the plain
truth if you ask me, will not the change be gradual? I must
say, yes, indeed; since it must come about by the change of
opinion in men’s minds; it is of course that whatever action
takes place must spring from opinion—from hope let us
say. Yes, it will be gradual; but do not let us deceive our-
selves, it must be complete and without compromise: one:
thing has to be aimed at and one alone: the reconstruction
of Society on such a basis that from thenceforth it will be
impossible for any man to make his private profit from the
compulsion of other men’s labour: that it will be impossible
for a man to labour duly without benefiting himself and
all other men.

Pretty much the reverse of this is at present the rule in
the productions of labour: when a piece of work is to be
put in the hand, the question asked of himself by the capitalist
is this: Will it sell at a profit to me? And the fuller meaning
of that question is developed by these two further ques-
tions: Can money be screwed out of the general public for 
it? That is the question, and the second is: How much over

the actual cost of production can I get for myself? or in
other words: How much can I cut off for myself from the
product of each workman’s daily labour?

Or will you have the two questions in plainer English
stll? technical words are not wanted here: these are the
questions: How much can I take by stealth from the pub-
lic? how much can I take by force from the workman?

These are the two pillars of England’s greatness; supply
and demand are the words used to cloak their native hide-
ousness, and men are hoodwinked by fine words.

But under the condition of things which I beg yoto try
to bring about, two questions would have to be asked when
anyone was about producing anything: first, will the thing
produced be useful to the world? second, will the making of
it give healthy and pleasurable occupation to the makers?

If both these questions cannot be answered in the
affirmative, then the work should not be done at all; the
product of it will either not be wealth positively, or it will
not be wealth relatively to the practical life of man that is, it
will either be worthless or the price for it will be too high:
for instance it may be desirable to polish steel forks highly
but if the work shortens men's lives the price for the polish-
ing is too high, and we ought to do without it.

At first sight it does not seem a great demand to make on
human wisdom to get to assert that no work should be
done which is not useful when done and not degrading to
do: but look around the world and think how the applica-
tion of such a maxim would alter the face of it! I say that the
vast majority of workers are under the present system en-
gaged in doing nothing with frightful toil: nay there is a 
side to modern labour which is worse even than that: the
greater number of people are poor, their household goods,
scanty as they are, they must have at the lowest possible
price, and their poverty creates the demand for wares which
ought to have no value at all, and which would have none if
there were not slaves of who must be provided with
such things as slaves alone will put up with: the poor must

live on poison since nothing else is cheap enough for them:
they live on poison and ‘get used to it,' as people phrase it;
that is, they are forced to perpetuate the degradation of a
part of the community, to spread it, to deepen it.

So you see people are kept poor that cheap wares may be
made, and being poor cheap wares are a necessity for them,
and that necessity can only be supplied by the cheap wages
(or poverty), which are necessary to allow riches to accu-
mulate in a few hands.

And now when I say that this is the reason why there is
no popular art now, surely the absence of beauty from the
ordinary life of civilized man looks a more serious thing
than many people who have thought and written on econo-
mical matters would allow: for that absence of art from the
matters of daily life is the badge of slavery: people who are
poor can have no art; for art cannot be produced without
thought, without freedom from sordid anxiety, above all
without leisure: and do you suppose that wares the very
soul of which is such qualities as these can compete in the
market with wares that have been screwed out of the neces-
sity of the poor; that are born from the high pressure of
machines tended by men who have no more time for
thought than the eager unremitting pursuit of those tireless
machines for ten hours a day may leave them?

No; popular art cannot live under the full development
of competitive commerce; the revolt against unhuman work
which is necessary for its existence would destroy the ex-
ploiting system of the capitalists, which appears by this
time to be rapidly approaching perfection: nor without
popular art can the art of the rich and cultivated long exist;
what is now left of it is but a reflex of the days before com-
mercialism began; while it was yet hanging in the balance, 
whether the days in which a man might be allowed to enjoy
the fruits of his own labour were to come without our
going through the terrible mill which the gospel of free
contract has provided for us.

As far as the mass of people is concerned art is gone or all
 
but gone from the daily life of man in civilized countries,
and I say that is no mere accident but a necessary conse-
quence of the rule of plutocratic anarchy : some branches of
human invention can live under that tyranny: it allows
learned men to seek out the secrets of nature and to subdue
her forces because these matters can be turned to the
advantage of the profit-market. But in art, the romance of
each day's life, there is nothing 'practical’ that is conver-
tible into money, so long as it is real: all plutocracy can do is
to degrade it into an hypocrisy, a sham of real feeling and
insight, a set of counters for the picture-dealers; it can do
that and in the end kill it, but it cannot use

Yes, art is not far from actual death and beauty is fading
out of the land before the poison of riches. Green and beauti-
ful places are still left in the countryside of England, but
the hand of decay is on them; the life of man is poor and
slavish there, and his dwellings, the sure token of the life
led in them, which were once sound, trim, and beautiful,
are giving place to miserable abortions which it is a pain
and grief to look at; mere scrapings from the heaps of filth
where you working-men live and which we call great cities.

And those terrible and frightful places; this horror
we call London, or those worse because fithier hells the
manufacturing districts- if ever the world escapes from
the nightmare of riches and poverty which now oppresses
us, will people from the midst of order and peace be able to 
understand what they were like?

And if we choose to consider the matter and face what
must be the future unless this living death of Commercial-
ism is swept away, do we not know what it must come to,
supposing that national ruin does not overtake us? no rest,
no beauty, no leisure anywhere: all England become like
the heart of Lancashire is now:  breeding-stye for flesh and
blood machines for the production of the profitt of capital:
machines, yes, but men also who, dimly perhaps, but miser-
ably certainly, will be conscious of their own degradation.

Yes, it may be that Commercialism will find for us plenty

of food and clothes and house-room, comforts even or lux-
urics: for us, I say, for most of us. It may be that, though it
must have  body of abject poverty to serve it, it wll pro-
duce somany rich men, and so many well-to-do men down
to the class of the weil fed prosperous artizan, that the class
of the paor siaves will not be very numerous and will be
powerless: that I know is the ideal of a large body of so-
called advanced thinkers: and they may realizeit, though [
o not think they wil,as I fervently hope they will not: for.
art, or the beauty of lite, would be wholly lacking to all
these classes, rich, middle-class, and poor they would pass
awretched bestial degraded existence, and the hope of the
progress of the race would have perished.

What is to save us from this misery, this hell? What but
a Social Revolution which shall take away from men at
once the power and the temptation of accumulating riches
or in other words of keeping a body of slaves to do their
dirty work for them: a Revolution which by abolishing
men's power of making  profit from their fellows’ labour
will abolish all classes: not the mere arbitrary distinction
between lord and commoner, gentleman and worker, but
the real and dreadful distinction between rich man and
poor, between the cultivated and the ignorant, between the
refined and the brutal, which now exists, and is the founda-
tion of plutocratic society.

I know a surely as I know that I breathe, that this
Social Revolution would give to each and all of us a fair
share of the good and evil of life: we should have our fair
share of troublesome work and no more than our fair share
for we should not then be set to work for the sake of work-
ing: there would no longer be any need to cumber the world
with mountains of wares: no need to weary our-
selves with making either the idiotic toys of the rich, or the
miserable rags of the poor, which form now by far the
greater part of the ‘of commerce. 

In all our work would be hope, and the greater part of it 
would be a labour of love, given freely and happily to the 

commonweal, as the commonweal would freely and un-
grudgingly supply our needs for us: the hours of such
work would to most of us be the happiest, but mere rest,
time for thought, or dreaming even, would not be lacking
to us, nor in any wise be grudged to us

Then we should have nature beautiful around us again,
for surely then no disgrace of foulness in air or water
would be suffered, nor would it in anywise need to be, with
science set free from the huckster's fetters: and remember
once more it is not mere carelessness of beauty as we are
now, the serving of our real needs, that has turned half
England into  foul and greasy cinderheap, but the in-
saiable compulsion of commerce on us to make an extra
profit from labour we know not for what or for whom.

Doubt it not that from all this art would spring art in
all forms, great and glorious, full of hope with eyes always
turned towards perfection.

Is it a dream? If so then let us give up all striving for
progress: do not let us worry ourselves about politcs, but
stand by and grin as one knave pushes the other out of the
saddle; for one or another will be much the same to us: let
us eat and drink for to-morrow we die—or better still let
us die to-day.

It is no dream but a cause; men and women have died
for it, not in the ancient days but in our own time: they lie
in prison for it, work in mines, are exiled, are ruined for it:
believe me when such things are suffered for dreams, the
dreams come true at last.

But how is the change to be brought about?

Then minds and hearts of men must be set on bringing it
about; that is clear; no noise of people puffing themselves
will do it, no mere electioneering dodges, no mere clatter-
ing of fine phrases amongst those who perfectly well agree.
with each other; it must come from the hearts of men who
are resolved on it. Yet do not mistake my meaning; I have
heard several people say: This is a thing which must be the
gradual birth of opinion; thercfore we, though we think
   
the change necessary, must take no active measures to
bring it about, but let it grow spontaneously.

Friends, such words may have the appearance of philo-
sophical wisdom and forbearance and tolerance, but I fear
their meaning is, I durst not though I would.

What other sign can there be of the growth of spon-
taneous opinion save eager and active attempts to spread
that opinion? is the opinion never to result in action? and
if ever when? if 'tis too early to-day, will it be late enough
to-morrow? Alas! for some of us it will be too late; for
every minute while we speak our fellows and friends are
living in degradation and dying in despair.

I say it is the plain duty of those who believe in the neces-
sity of social revolution, quite irrespectively of any date
they may give to the event, first to express their own dis-
content and hope when and where they can, striving to im-
press it on others; secondly to learn from books and from
living people who are willing, or I will say, who can be made,
to teach them, in as much detail as possible what are the
ends and the hopes of Social Revolution; and thirdly to join
any body of men which is honestly striving to give means of
expression to that discontent and hope, and to teach people
the details of the aim of Constructive Revolution. You will
understand that although I have numbered these duties
first, second, and third, they must be all set about together:
you can neither express your discontent nor learn what
hopes there are of making it fruitful without union with
others who have those aims in view.

And mind you by union I mean a very serious matter: I
mean sacrifce to the Cause of leisure, okeasure and money
each according to his means: I mean sacrifice of individual
whims and vanity, of individual misgivings, even though
they may be founded on reason, as to the means which
organizing body may be forced to use: remember without
organization the cause is but a vague dream, which may
lead to revolt, to violence and disorder, but which will be
speedily repressed by those who are blindly interested in

sustaining the present anarchical tyranny which is mis-
named Society: remember also that no organization is
possible without the sacrifices I have been speaking of;
without obedience to the necessities of the Cause.

Educate, Agitate, Organize; these words the motto of
our Federation do most completely express what is neces-
sary to be done by those who have any hope in the future
of the People.

To feel the wrongs which oppress ourselves and our
fellows, to learn what remedies there are for them, to de-
clare openly the wrongs and remedies and to band to-
gether to make that declaration effective: how can those
who wish to call themselves free and honest do less than
this?

And the consequences that may come of our action?
What can they be in the long run save peace and order?
You who fear revolt, you who fear revolution, think what
blind revolt and aimless revolution may mean; shake off at
least enough of your cowardice and sloth to consider what
must be the consequences of blind repression, of aimless up-
holding of a state of Society where side by side with refine-
ment and cultivation dwell brutality and ignorance; and in
which this dreadful contrast is not an accident but a neces-
sity of the existence of your boasted civilized society.

I tell you civilization will begin on the day when we de-
termine that Riches and Poverty shall disappear into one
commonweal of happy people. I tell you that civilization,
long talked of, much boasted of, never yet attained, will
begin on the day when the organization of the claims of
labour is strong enough to force on society the acceptation
of those claims: when the necessary and inevitable revo-
lution, the child of all the long centuries of history, which
while we speak is being born out of the corruption of the
organized anarchy which it is doomed to destroy, when
that revolution shall take definite and orderly form, and 
sweep away for ever the two great foes of humanity, riches
and poverty.

It is for you working men to attain this end: learn what
you have to claim and unite to claim it: who or what can
resist you then?

* 'There also shall we be free from the troubling of kings and scoundrels'are
the memorable words used by the freemen of Norway when they left their 
country at the end of the tenth century to find freedom amidst the terrible wastes
of Iceland: but for them the history and mythology of the North would have 
been forgotten.
