According to LeMire, this is the same as Origins of Ornamental Art.
He has it listed under this date.

iWidely reported, but mostly just a standard one para snippet/

This is the only long one I found. Paragraph breaks by GS. 

 West London Observer - Saturday 25 October 1890  p. 7

MR. MORRIS ON "ART FOR THE PEOPLE.” 

On Monday night. at the Atheneum Hall, Tottenham Court Road, under the auspices
of the Commonweal Branch of the Socialist League, Mr. William Morris, of
Kelmscote House, 20, Upper Mall. Hammersmith, delivered a lecture on "Art for
the People." Having traced the history and development from prehistoric times,
when the cave dweller scatched a rude imitation of the mammoth on the walls of
his dwelling, - and dealt with the imitations which it had undergone under the
influence of the ancient Egyptians, the Greeks, the Romans, the Goths, and
others, down to the time when the English workman placed in position the last
stone of Henry VII.’s chapel at Westminster, Mr. Morris asked what had become
of popular art in the comparatively ehort time which had since elapsed, during
which England had grown from an island kingdom into a mighty empire, dominating
the world. He could tell them in three words.  It had disappeared. 

That was a strange story indeed, and they might well doubt its truth, for the
change was tremendous. So far from people rejoicing in the making and using of
artistic things they did not know that art existed. What passed as decorative
art was touched by the hand of man, but never bv his mind.  He worked at it not
knowing what he did. The workmen found work a sacrifice, a burden, which they
would cast off altogether if they could. Not one hour's work would be done if
it were not that the worker feared death by starvation if he left off working.  

He
hoped no one present supposed that under such conditions they could have art
which had any life in it. If they did he conld not imagine the depth of a
stupidity which thought that elavery would bring forth art. Rich men spent vast
sums of money on what they considered art, and in isolating themselves from the
increasing population and misery, and could they wonder at the rich and blind
trying to escape from the consequences of the system which had made them rich.
The system of hierarchical society had given place to what was known as free
contract, and the license of competition had taken the place of a system which
regulated the relations of life in accordance with <em>a priori</em> ideas of
what was right and just. The effect of this change on popular art had been to
destroy it. No change in religion, or in this, that, or the other, but a change
in the relations between the two classes of men in society. 

The great gulf between the rich and the poor, between the two nations nominally
under the same laws, had swallowed up the popular art which had produced our
ancient buildings, in which every man's intelligence was subordinated to the
great work of art; whereas it was now accepted as a fact that whatever
intelligence a non-gentleman might possess he must on no account exercise it
during his working hours. In order to win that privilege he must raise himself
up  and be a gentleman — that is have nothing to do, and exercise his
intelligence in doing it. 

The real artist should be considered as a workman, and he wanted the real
workman to elevate himself to the position of an artist.  That could not be, as
long as the labour war went on, which made him sacrifice himself in the
interests of his union or the war which was being carried on. It was a natural
law that man must work, and in proportion as he had pleasure in his work so
would his life be happy or unhappy. 

The first thing necessary in order to bring about a better condition of things
was that there should be no more poverty, none of those morbid troubles which
destroy the imagination and intelligence, or turns them into other channels.
Every man most be certain of earning a due livelihood, and those things which
were necessary for the mind as well as for the body. All men must have a due
measure of rest and recreation for the body and the mind, and the daily hours
for such labour as was unpleasant must be very short. Eight hours a day for such
toil would one day appear to them an absolute absurdity. All work which was
unpleasant should as far as possible be done away with, looked upon as a
nuisance. It should be done by machinery; but machinery should never be used as
it was now, in doing work in which man could take pleasure and delight. 

Again, those who were to produce beauty should live in it. A man’s home must be
cleanly and orderly, and beautiful. That should not be so hard a thing to
accomplish, seeing that the whole world was beautiful, save when men had made
it ugly.  Men should also be educated and have a due share in the stored-up
knowledge of the world — not down to his station in life, but up to his
capacity.  Lastly, the last claim for labour would come to this, that there
must be no class distinctions. All crafts should be honourable and honoured,
and every man should be able to raise himself in the respect and admiration of
his fellow-citizens by the exercise of his own craft.

These were the only conditions under which they could hope to see a revival of
popular art, and he asked them whether it was worth while to strive to bring
about this happy life to which he had alluded. The price which they would have
to pay was the entire reconstruction of society. No mere palliative would
suffice, all would soon go back again to its present condition. The rich would
have to choose between having the great mass of mankind as their equals or
keeping them down as slaves, and whatever shame and misery there might be
attached to the position of a slave there was one more disgraceful and wretched
still — that of a slaveholder.  (Cheers).
