 East & South Devon Advertiser. - Saturday 27 January 1894 


ENGLAND BEFORE THE CONQUEST. 

ADDRESS BY WILLIAM MORRIS. 

At the South Loudon Art Gallery, the other night, Mr. W. Morris gave an address
"Early England." Mr. Morris said that the past history of England was not of so
absorbing an interest as to lead them to forget that of other countries. There
was about it certain wont romance compared with that of other nations on the
Continent, and as it progressed it tended more and more to the commonplace ;
but to them, who lived amid the scenes in which it had been enacted, it had a
special interest, which consecrated it to their thoughts. would endeavour to
picture for them the England of long while ago as guide the future. PRB-ROMA*
DATS. Of the earliest of all Englands they could say little, because they knew
little of it before Gcesar crossed the Thames and his soldiery plunged into the
perilous woods of Middlesex. In those days they bad tribe fighting against
tribe, and finding it necessary raise some sort of fortification or earthwork,
such for instance that at Effingham Castle, which from promontory on the
Wiltshire downs looked over the rich valley of the Thames. It was named their
Saxon forefathers, who found it there, after tne Vnlcan of the North ; and
there was also the great White Horse, which he believed to be of earlier origin
than that generally ascribed. The man must be hard to move who could look upon
Stonehenge without emotion, although the stones were mucn fewer now than when
be (Mr. Morris) went to school Marlborough ; and then there was the great
Wansdyke, which ran across Wiltshire, which he regarded dating from a period
long before St. Ann was known. THB OP CIVILISATION. These were records of a
life of struggle for better things prior to the arrival of the Komans in the
country. These brought the blessings of civilisation and destroyed the
ebanoesof British progress. They made roads for the safe conduct of their
taxgatherers ; but they deprived the people of character and spirit, and made
them an easy prey to the next comers, who took over the land which it was
nobody’s business to defend.  ARRIVAL OP TUB NORSEMEN. The incursion of the men
from the North Sea made new set of pictures for them, and although these men
were rough, brutal, and cruel, these terrible rovers who founded the English
nation were free from vulgarity, and brought with them literature which was
unwritten at the time, but fragments of which still lived, reflecting the minds
of the people who produced them, did all the earlier literature of tne world.
The civilisation of the Roman Empire was founded on the city. A city in which
they found many parishes, as for instance Norwich, was bound to be of Roman
origin; whilst Yarmouth, which had but one, was not.  But when their successors
took a town they burnt it and went back to {heir simple habitations by the
riverside and elsewhere, which were afterwards to grow into villages and
centres, the names of some of which had survived their actual existence—as, for
instance, the Hundred of Ossulton, in which Hammersmith was situate. No one
knew where Ossulton was now. There were few works in the vernacular, and these
were not the grand old Icelandic sagas—nothing that could tell what the life of
ancient England really was in the tenth century. England's one king with
genius. It was the energy of the men from the north which caused England to
make headway, and so progress until the time of Alfred, son of Ethelwulf. lso
other man of genius sat on the throne of England save Cromwell, who was mourned
more during life by his friends than at death, and after all Alfred was the one
man of genius, who ever held that position in this country. Passing on through
the days of Eadgar, of Olaf, of Sweyne, Mr. Morris came to the days of Harold
the Hapless, than whose history nothing could be more romantic. He could only
regret that no native pen had preserved for them such a narrative of that fatal
Battle of Senlac as would have proceeded from an Icelandic source. So England
fell once more into the hands of conqueror, and became part of the European
feudal system. What would have happened had Harold succeeded against Duke
William could not say, but he did not think the difference would have been very
great.  But, looking over the pictures of the past, they might recall with
profit some of that simplicity of life, directness of character, and
fearlessness in action which had characterised their forefathers, and which
would still be of use as England moved towards its future. 
