
 Dundee Evening Telegraph - Tuesday 05 April 1887 p. 3

ADDRESS SOCIALISM W. MORRIS. Mr W. Morri*, London, delivered address on
 "Socialism" the Hall last night at " social" of the Rev. Mr Macrae's
 congregation. He accounted f«>r the present condition of society by the fact
 that industrialism was bated on monopoly. That was to say, monopolist* held
 the whole of society in their power. Outside there were nothing but certain
 machines—some wood, leather, or steel, and some human flesh and bone with
 souls in their If. lie had heard a monopolist described a man who hands wares
 to you and gets price for them without adding their value. would monopolist
 man who compelled them buy wares at enhanced price without adding to their
 value. Instead of being mere cheat atul swindler, therefore, the monopolist
 was ratlu r highway robber. (Laughter.) The monopolist vas at present master
 of society. lie was sometimes called a capitalist, which was same thing,
 livery mail who could work could earn more by his labour thau was absolutely
 necessary keep him alive ; but he must have raw material and tools, and,
 unfortunately, tilings went, tiro necessaries man must have to enable him to
 labour lia been allowed to the private property of individuals. l nder
 circumstances, the capitalists not only forced the |»eople to work for them,
 but, they had whole of the industrial production their hands, they had
 practically the lives of the people their hands also. This explained the
 inferior condition the worker, who could only add one to his own fortune
 while was adding ten the his master. Four or five hundred years .igo tho
 people lived pretty well—better, or all events not worse, than in our own
 Jay. During that the capacity for producing had increased enormously ; but
 the difference between what the worker* produced and what they got had gone,
 not to them, but sustain the classes |>eople who did nut produce ami their
 hangers on. (Hear, hear.) 



 Cambridge Independent Press - Saturday 02 October 1886 

MR. WM. MORRIS ON SOCIALISM. lecture on socialism at Manchester, by Mr. W,
Morris, Mr. Morris said it seemed to him that most people whom one addressed
did not put to themselves the momentous questions of why they were in the
position in which they were, of why the working man, the beggar, the pauper,
the criminal was in his position, and of why the rich man was his. Most people
did not doubt the necessity of the exi.-tence of the classes into which
society was divided, nor did they suppose that it was possible that this
arrangement might not go on for ever. Socialists on the c»n rary believed that
they knew why these class distinctions existed, and how they had grown into
what they were. That growth, they admitted, bad been inevitable in the past,
hut, so far from it being an eternal thing they believed that this arrangement
would in itself destroy itself, giving place to something else, and that would
be a societ}’in which there would ba no rich, because there would he no poor
for there could be no rich men unless there were poor ones. Proceeding to
sketch the present composition of society, Mr. Morris remarked that it was
to-day still the rule of our society that those who worked should fare the
hardest, and that the reward of idleness should generally be abundant wealth
(applause). The question thereupon arose as to which was right—the moral
rules, the religious, which we were supposed to guided by, or the practice
which went on underneath that morality and religion. One of the two things
must ba wrong, and if they adh- red to the practice let them at all events
give up the religion. In society at present composed th -re were two great
classes, the rich and the poor, the first monopolising all means of the
production of wealth save one, viz., the power of labour, which was possessed
the second. The rich could compel the poor to sell their power of labour to
them on terms which insured the continuance of the rich class, and, moi cover,
it must be marked that the class which lacked wealth was the cla*s that
produced it. This surely was but sorry result of all the struggles of man
towards civilization. man was good enouffh to be master over others, to own
them. Whatever the result of such thing might be to them, it ruined him,
morally at all events. Equality of fellowship was necessary for developing the
innate good and restraining th» innate evil in everyone. We wanted friends and
good fellows, not masters over one another (.applause). Socialism said that
society must be the condition of man’s existence man. and that the aim of that
society was even something higher than the greatest happiness of the greatest
number. The aim must he to offer chance of happiness to everyone, chance of
happiness which he himself alone could refuse ; to give every man an
opportunity for the full development of each human capacity. Socialism denied
the title of society to any system whicn degraded one class to exalt another,
and asserted that if injured even any one member of society for the benefit of
all the rest poisoned and corrupted the springs of our society (applause). The
real aim of socialism was the destruction of monopoly, and the assuring to
everyone born into the world his |full share of happiness (applause). The
motto they should inscribe on their banner was, From each what he can : to
each what needs” (applause.) 




Birmingham Daily Post - Monday 17 May 1886 p. 5


MR. W. MORRIS ON SOCIALISM. Last night Mr. W. Morris delivered an address at
Baskerville Hall, the Crescent, on ",Sosialisin."-Mlr. D Balker presided over
a large audience;-Mr. MuORTS said there were few people who put to themselves
the question, "Why am I in the position in which I am?" And few people, until
recently, had ever doubted that the classes into which society was divided
were not absolutely neces- sary. It appeared to be supposed that it was
necessary for the existence of soeiety that there should be a rich class and a
poor one, and people did not trouble their heads as to what mails some belong
to the rich and some to the poor class. There had always beenh in communities
called civilised a glass which had much work and little wealth, and another
class which had mush wealth and little work. To-day it was the role of society
that those who worked most should fare the hardest, and that the reward of
idleness should be abundant wealth. Present. day society was a sham. If it was
not for fear of revolt workmen would only have to eat as much as would enable
them tolive endwontand breathe. Few workers now could be said to have more
than bare subsistence wages. Under the present system workers when they grew
sick and old would die outright but for the refuge of the work. house, which
was made as prison-like as possible, for fear that the lower-paid workers
should in their despair take refuge there before their time of industrial
death. This was the distinction between the two classes-that the ote possessed
nothing but the power of labour inherent in their bodies, and the other
possessed everything necessary to make that labour fruitful. The class that
lacked wealth was the class which produced it-the wealth owners only consumed
it. It might be said that the possessing classes worked. A large part did, but
their work was almost always unfruitful, and sometimes it was directly harmfuL
There was always a ldeas struggle going on between the employer and the
employed. The inter- ests of the tsio classes were opposed to each other.
There were some who hoped that a new religion would arise that would take hold
of the hearts of men that they would forego the opportunity of gambling with
other people's property, and living luxuriously at other people'd expense, and
that they would live justly and austerely, and consider themselves nothing but
the trus- tees of the vwealth that others bad made. No man. in his opinion,
was good enough to be a master over others. Equality of fellowship was ab-
5s1utely necessary. HIe hoped for the rise of a new religion called Socialism,
which denied the title of society to degrade one class at the expense of
another. Socialisms assorted that each man should pay his tribute of labour to
nature, and that each should receive his share of the wealth which each had
done his best to create. Combina- tion for livelihood, and the assurance of an
equal chance for everyone was what they wanted to bring about. There were
abundant signs of an approaching change in the present state of things for
those who could see tiem. They wanted to make men leaveoff saying "Thtluis
mine" and " That is thine," and to say "It is all ours." They looked forward
to a society in which all, property should be held collectively. The remedy
for all the evils was in the hards of the workers. They m ust get rid of t le
use- less class, and let tle producer, in one way or another, haveall that he
produced. When that took place the land, the capital, and the machinery would
naturally fall into the possessioit of the producer, since it would be use-
less to anyone elss: In fact there would soon be no one else toupossess it.
The non-producing class would melt into the general society of workers. It lay
with the working classes to bring this about. Whatever they demanded would be
yielded if they worked with reason. It rested with the workers whether the
revolution should come violently ox peacefully. 



Northampton Mercury - Saturday 04 July 1885 p.9


MR. MORRIS ON SOCIALISM. On Sunday, two lectures on Socialism were given in
this town, under tbe auspices of the local Secular Society, by Mr. William
Motrin, the eminent author of the Earthly Paradise and many other poems which
have commanded considerable attention in the literary world by reason of their
brilliant imagery, powerful emotion, and consummate metrical melody, as well
as by tbe daring thoughts they express. Mr. Morris is treasurer of the
Socialist League, aud the editor of its journal, The Commonweal, so that what
be has said upon this subject may be taken as reliable from the one point of
view. The first lecture was given in the morning in the Cow Meadow, and was
entitled" Socialism." There was a large concourse of people. Mr. Edm-und
Powell presided, and said he did not know what Socialism was, and like a great
many more persons present, he came to be instructed.—Mr. Morris expressed the
pleasure he fett at having the opportunity of speaking son such a subject in
snch place, for he knew there was no town in England where a man was so likely
to receive a fair hearing as at Northampton. He could not, one morning, deal
with the whole question, so he would merely try to give them something to
think about. hat Socialism ? Its chief and special aim was to put in the place
of competition, which all must admit was too prevalent now, the principles of
co-operation and brotherhood. There was at present terrible contrast between
wealth and work, and the Socialists' aim was that there should no rich men,
and no poor men, but all wealthy men. The real business of man on earth was
happiness. If there was anything which interfered with happiness it was a duty
to remove it. The position was that man was on the earth. Nature was the enemy
of man, but man had fought till nature lay in bis power. was there to
speak'for man, and he knew nothing higher than humanity it was' humanity they
had to look up to, and, to use a stronger expression—to worship. Man had,
indeed, conquered nature, but the people who had done this were now trodden
underfoot by other men—it was now man who enslaved the people who had released
them from the bonds of nature. Society as at present constituted was divided
into three classes —tbe aristocracy, the middle class, and the lower class.
The aristocracy were the privileged clase. Tnis class perhaps filled certain
functions one time, but filled them no longer, so that it might really be said
there were two classes the country —those who had, and those who had not.
Those who had could drive a hard bargain with those who had not. The former
class owned the machinery, the materials, and the wealth, whilst the latter
only had their hands. The result was that the workers had to work one third of
the day foi themselves, and the rest for their employers. The speakei then
gave a short account the relations between wealth aud labour former years. He
described trades unions as institutions which had done good in their time, but
they were becoming day day less effectual. Socialists demanded that the
produce of a man's labour ought to belong to the man himself. In this
condition of things no one would be out of work and no one overworked. How
were they to further the ends of Socialism Some said send good members to
Parliament, but he did not think so. He said first of all they should agitate
there was never any good without creating discontent. Secondly, he said,
educate, and thirdly, organise. Mr. Morris concluded by expounding the cause
and principles of the Socialist League, whose delegate he was.—On the Chairman
inviting questions or opposition, Mr. T. Barber stepped upon the platform. He
expressed his agreement with many of the utterances of the lecturer, but
disapproved of what had said of the causes of the present social inequalities,
and the means he advocated of altering them. He then proceeded argue that the
true remedy was the pure and unadulterated gospel of Christ, which was every
Sunday attacked by Secularist lecturers from that place.—The Chairman,
however, declined amidst signs of assent from Mr. Barber's friends to permit
Mr. Barber to take this line. —Mr. Barber was proceeding to give the testimony
of Robert Owen on a certain point, when he was again interrupted by the
Chairman, and finally left the platform, saying that the statement that that
was a free platform a mockery and a sham. Mr. Morris reply said that his
Socialism was uusectarian and had nothing to do with speculative opinions.—ln
the evening Mr. R. Reid presided at Mr. Morris's second lecture at the Secular
Hall, on " How we live and bow ought to live." It was a strong condemnation of
the powers that be, and a plea for a Socialistic state of society; and in the
course of it, the lecturer spoke of capital as the wealth which fools created
for rogues to grow fat on." At its conclusion several questions were put. In
answer to one asking how he would begin in forming his Socialistic state, Mr.
Morris said it would take him two or three hours to go into it, and he could
not answer short time he had at his disposal. Another gentleman wanted to
learn Mr. Morris's opinion of municipalities buying over public works. The
reply was that such purchases were beneficial to the community, and were a
step towards the realisation of Socialism. 








Pall Mall Gazette - Wednesday 03 March 1886 


AIR. W. MORRIS ON SOCIALISM. A meeting in connection with the Workers'
Brotherhood was held last evening in Liverpool, the object of which was to
hear a lecture delivered by Mr. William Morris on " Socialism," in relation to
the recent London riots. Explaining the basis of Socialism, he said that
society at the present day was founded on the necessity of the human race for
constant labour, for the ceaseless contest with nature which, without labour,
would give us nothing. For ages both work and the wealth won by that work had
been unequally divided. There had always been in communities commonly called
civilized a class that had much work and little wealth alongside of another
class which had much wealth and little work. The last-named class could, under
the present constitution of society, compel the poor who had nothing but a
power of labour inherent in their bodies, to sell their labour to the rich on
terms which ensured the continuance of their riches. The consequence was that
the workers died before their time-in other words, they were starved to death,
and they would die outright but for the work- house, which was made as
prison-like as possible to hasten the process. Though masters did not now
possess the whip of the earlier feudal times, they held one equally potent in
the shape of the workers' fear of starvation. In sober earnest he asserted
that no man was good enough to be a master over other men. Whatever the result
might be to the workers it certainly half ruined the master, and therefore
equality of fellowship was necessary for developing the innate good and
restraining the innate evil of mankind. Combination and a chance of equality
for every one was what Socialists wanted to bring about. Socialists claimed
that progress had been steadily made in the direction t hey advocated, and
that all they had to do was to help onwards the outcome of that progress. The
history of what were called civilized ages recorded three systems-slavery
under the classical peoples, serfdom in the middle ages, and wage labour at
the present time. Thus two systems had disappeared, and it was manifestly
absurd to say that the third would not also be swept away; indeed, there were
abundant signs of the approaching change. With a cheap generosity the rich
classes of the present day could afford to say that all should be equal in the
eye of the law, so long as they knew that the poor could not avail themselves
of that equality. They wanted all that to be swept away ; they wanted people
to leave off saying "This is mine, and that is thine," and to say instead,
"This is ours." Property at the present time meant the power of preventing
wealth from being used for the good of the community. For example, a man might
have a large tract of land which could be made to yield abundantly, yet which
he could not cultivate, and refused to allow others to cultivate. It rested
with the workers themselves to bring about the desired change. Whatever they
demanded must be yielded if that demand were consonant with reason. For
instance, the Chartists claimed politicai freedom, and we had that now
notwithstanding great opposition. Like that, Socialism would be put upon its
trial. What amount of resistance it might meet none could tell, but it was
certain it would meet with no forcible resistance unless the upper classes
could induce a portion of the working classes to take an active part in
pernicious opposition. 



Edinburgh Evening News - Saturday 02 November 1889 


MR WILLIAM MORRIS ON SOCIALISM. 

Mr William Morris lectured on Socialism in the Oddfellow's Hall, Forrest Road,
Edinburgh, laat night. There was a large attendance, over which Mr Walter Crane
presided. Morris denied that there was freedom of contract between workmen and
their masters because one of thw essentials of freedom waa equality. He
illustrated this from the recent London dockers' strike. In past times the
workmen were slaves, and men in the position of these dockers were not in a
better position. Tne upper classes were reaping the advantages of civilisation,
for they did not need to pay for their slaves as they did in past times. The
upper classes had the advantages of civilisation, yet closely looked at they
had not gained as much as they thought they had; and, the other hand, the
inferior class had gained considerably more. But they were not quite in the
immediate present— they were in the fear of the one and the hope of the other.
Once they got rid of class war which necessarily kept them in enmity, what they
would have left would be a system of society that depended on their mutually
helping each other. Fairly and squarely that was Socialism. They had made a
change on [sic]  the politics of London.  The Tories remained pretty much as
they were, and the Whig party had made a step or two downwards. They had also
the constitutional Liberals at the head of which stood Mr Gladstone—
(applause)—whom he did not honour very much, and who, if they would allow him
to say so, was now getting considerably out date. After that there came the
Radical party; that did not signify very much. The Radical party at one time or
another had found itself be in the position of not beingg exactly in the line
of progress. But the old Radical party, which practically was bound hand and
foot to that false idea of the age, free contract, had now deserted that
position, and there was longer that party, but in its place the party with
which he as a Communist differed and quarrelled, but which was the Socialist
Radical party. Rev. J. Glasse proposed a vote of thanks to Mr Morris, which was
accorded.

 The Scotsman - Saturday 02 November 1889 

MR WILLIAM MORRIS ON SOCIALISM. 

Last night Mr William Morris addressed a
meeting on the subject of Socialism in the Upper Oddfellows' Hall , Edinburgh.
Mr WALTER CRANE, who presided, said he attributed his conversion to his 
friend William Morrip . At the same time he thought he had been a Socialist
from childhood . Mr MORRIS, who was well received , began by remarking how
curiously history was written, and proceeded to give in short elliptical
sentences two summaries ot the history of Great Britain and Ireland from the
close of the war with France to the present time, both of which, he said,
were different, and both true. The one summary dealt with the commercial
and intellectual progress of tho country and the great changes brought about
by the general introduction of machinery, the other with the poverty and
suffering — with specific allusion to the Irish famine—which had accompanied the
economic changes to which he had referred. There was a continuous
struggle, he said, between the two sides of society, the rich and the poor,
though dwelling in the same country and nominally governed by the same laws .
It was impossible for these two nations to be united, for the one lived
on the suffering of the other. [ Applause.] There could be no such
thing as free contract between men who might not have their breakfast and
thnse who had. Modern society, indeed, enjoyed all the advantages which
were possible in a aiave state , with the difference that, instead of a slave
being bought he could be had for a sum for a time all the same. What waa
required was a society based on freedom, and not on slavery — (applause) — on
mutual helping of each other- That was Socialism. Injury to one was
injury to all . In speaking of tba abolition of useless work, he said there
would be still a large amount of work which would be desirable both in the
doing of it and in its results. He had been trying to drive some such thought
into the heads of the people at the Art Congress but he had found there was a
most gross infatuation of ignorance among them as among others on these
points. There had been talk of introducing art into dwellings of people who
were living in wretchedness , but as his friend the Rev. Mr. Glasse had observed,
the best ornament in such cottages was a flitch of bacon. (Laughter.) Mr
Morris concluded by referring to the sympathy accorded to the London dock
labourers during tho recent strike, and to the progress of Socialism in London, 
where he considered it had changed the political spirit within the past two
years. On the motion of the Rev. Mr GLASSE , Mr Morris was cordially
thanked for his lecture. 




 Yarmouth Mercury - Saturday 31 August 1889 p.7

LECTURE ON SOCIALISM BY MR. WILLIAM MORRIS. 

On Wednesday evening, a lecture
upon Socialism, was delivered in the Corn-hell, under the auspices of the
Yarmouth Branch of the Socialist League, by Mr. William Morris, of London. Mr.
C. Reynolds occnpied the chair, and there was a fair attendance. 

Mr. Morris after referring to the thoughts and ideas which they should keep in
their minds during his lecture, drew several contrasts between the working and
non-working classes. They had to consider, he said, how it was that there was a
working class, and other classes in the community. In considering it, he did
not wish to exaggerate the evils of one class more than another. The contrast
between the working and non-working class was sufficiently startling when all
admissions were made that could be made. The workers were worse off than the
non-workers, and when they considered that labour was the source of all wealth,
and that by the laws of nature, all men ought to work to get a livelihood, that
statement, as he had said was sufficiently startling. The working classes were
fed with inferior food, and clad with inferior clothes, while the great
proportion of that class, had not only to live on coarser and worse victuals
than the nonproducers, but they had not enough of it to keep up their vitality, so
they suffered from disease and early death, which arose from starvation. As to
their clothes, they were so ill-clad that the dirt and foulness of their garments
formed part of the material. Then there was the question of the housing of
the working classes, and his experience showed that that generally was
in proportion greatly inferior to their food and clothing. The best of their
houses or apartments were not fit for human beings to live in, while the
wretchedness of them blunted their sense of propriety. What he had seen was
sufficient to make him feel ashamed of himself, and of the whole civilisation
in which he lived. (Applause.) Referring to education, Mr. Morris said many
people boasted about their elementary education, which they said was so good.
He did not think it was so good. What he wanted to know was why it was that
they had elementary education for one class, and liberal education for another
class. Another item in the contrast between the two classes was the leisure and
elbow room, which the expensive class considered their birthright, which the
workmen never knew of. If a professional man did a little more than his daily
work, he would be told to be careful, and to consider bis health. If a working man
took a holiday he found it went against his purse and conscience, as he knew
that by doing so, he was taking the bread out of the mouths of his family. That
was part of the contrast. Referring to the condition of the English language, the
lecturer said they were often told that they must not write or speak to them in
literary style. He thought the working meu had the best of that, because the
English of their drawing-rooms, and leading articles, was such astonishing
mongrel jargon, that it was hardly worth calling English all. In the
intellectual position of the classes, there was also a very great contrast.
They could not fail to see that the moral and intellectual condition of the
working classes was based upon their physical condition—(applause)—and the
condition of those classes were in a degraded condition to the upper classes,
and though their condition were raised, they would he still in the same
position. With regard to the strikers, no one could sympathise with them more
than he could. (Applause.) When those men had conquered, and they would do so,
they would find that they had not conquered everything, and that the next thing
they would have to consider would be how to improve their position. They would
always be in a dependent position, so long as they were in an inferior
condition to another class. Why was there that contrast? There was no
difference in the race, and the grandson of a self-made man might be just as
refined, quite as unenergetic, and quite as stupid as a man with fifty
generations of titled fools at his back. After thinking of that contrast, they
should first think that it was evil, and secondly that it was caused by
artificial regulations and customs and laws, or rules, which could be
abolished, leaving them free to work and live as the laws of nature would let
them live. When they got to that condition of affairs they would have to accept
Socialism as a basis for the new order of things, or else they would have to get a
better basis. Society was divided into two classes: those who rendered services
to the public, and those who did not. The arrangements of society seemed to him
to need alteration, hut there were men who must rebel against it. On the one
hand, there was the dishonest tyrant, interested in its continuance and on the
other, the cowardly slaves of the tyrant, and both were contemptible, and such
a world as they would have needed no hell to supplement it. (Applause.) Some
people admitted that it could be altered, others did not want it, and others were
so hard worked and miserable, that they had not time to.tbink of it. As the
tyrant and slave were such, he appealed to those of the unserviceable class who
were ashamed of their position, and beginning to understand the crime of living
without producing and who would be serviceable if they could be. Referring to
the strike, Mr. Morris said it was a strike of unskilled labour, and although
some said it could not successful, he knew it would be. (Applause.) The public
were in favour of the strikers, and he could not see why that should not always
be the case, when the many were compelled to work for the few. (Applause.) Not
only could it be, but in the long run it must be. (Applause.) The lecturer then
entered at length into the question of monopoly, contending that materials and
tools should be the property of the whole community, and be used by every one,
who would then be equal, and everyone would work for their own livelihood. That
was the ideal society thought of by men whom he called reasonable, but who had
been called by very different names, and everything that was bad, in short,
Socialists —(applause)—who might even he prosecuted as malicious persons. In
conclusion, Mr. Morris said it was necessary to abolish monopoly, and
re-construct society on a new basis. (Applause.) Several questions having been
put, and satisfactorily answered by the lecturer, the meeting concluded by a hearty
vote of thanks being accorded to him. 


 Eastern Daily Press - Friday 30 August 1889, p.3

MR. W. MORRIS ON SOCIALISM. 

A lecture was given at the Corn Hall, Yarmouth, on
Wednesday evening by William Morris of London, poet and art critic, author of the "Earthly
Paradise,” on the subject of "Socialism." There was a fair attendance of the working
class, Mr. C. Reynolds occupying the chair, with the Socialistic words placarded at
his back, "Liberty", "Fraternity", "Equality". The Chairman having opened the
proceeding*, Mr. Morris proceeded with his lecture, and after soma remarks as to  the thoughts and
ideas which they should keep in their minds during his discourse, he drew several
contrasts between the working and non-working classes. There was one thing
they had to consider, and that was how it happened that there was a working class
and that there were other classes in the community. In considering this he was
very far from wanting to exaggerate the evils of one class more than another.
There was indeed no need of exaggeration. The contrast between the working and
nonworking classes was sufficiently startling when all admissions were made
that could be made. It did not need many words to show that. It was simply that
the workers were worse off than the non-workers, and when they considered that
labour was the source of all wealth and that by the laws of nature all men ought
to work to get livelihood, that statement, he had said, was sufficiently startling. The
working classes were fed with inferior food, clad with inferior clothes, while
the great proportion of that class not only had to live on coarser and worse victuals
than the non-producers, but they had not enough of those victuals to keep up
their vitality, they suffered from the disease and early death which came from
starvation. As to their clothes, they were so ill-clothed that the dirt and
foulness of their garments formed part of the material. Then there was the
housing, and his experience showed that generally was proportionately
inferior to their food and clothing. The best of their houses or apartments
were not fit for human beings to live in, while the wretchedness of them
blunted one’s sense of propriety. As to the worse half, a person in his position
seldom stumbled across them, as he must go into the real and genuine slums. But what he had
seen was sufficient, and made him feel ashamed of himself and of the whole
civilisation in which he lived. [Applause.] The contrast between the class of
non-producers and producers was horrid, and that was no exaggeration. If one reflected that
the foundation of one class was so different from another class, it was perfectly
clear that the whole of the line of that class must be, from the bottom upward,
different from the other. He wanted to know why there wan that contrast. ["Hear,
hear," and applause, and a Voice: "That the trades union point”[sic]] First of all
they should consider the matter of education, by which he meant something more
than ordinary instruction in schools and so forth. There were some people fond of
boasting about the elementary education, saying how good it was and all that. He did
not think it was so good. What he wanted to know was why it was that they had elementary
education for one and liberal education for another class. If some of the upper
class acquired only a little Latin, French, or German, ho kept it down as something
to be ashamed of. Whilst if a working man were to know a little French or Latin he would be
looked
upon us a superior person, a sort of genius, and he evidently would be a man of
character to be possessed of that knowledge. Another item in the contrast between 
the two classes was the leisure and elbow-room  which the expensive class considered their
birthright, which the lower class of workmen did not even know of. If a
professional man did a little more than his daily work he would be told to be careful
and consider his health. If a working man took a holiday he found it went against
his purse and conscience, as he knew that by doing so he was taking the bread out of the
mouths of his family. This was part of the contrast. A professional man considered
it absolutely necessary that he should have a holiday at a certain time of the
year. That was a contrast between, not the extremes, but between a standard  of the
non-produoers and a standard of the producers. Another point too was the public
amusements, in which different and not so refined plays were provided to suit the
working man to what would be given if the more educated class were the audience. Another
subject was the condition of the English language and English literature. It was often
said that you must not write or speak to them in literary style. He thought the working
men had the best of that, because the English of their drawing-rooms and
leading articles was such an astonishing mongrel jargon that it was hardly worth while
calling it English at all. In the intelectual position of the classes again there
was a wide contrast. It could not fail to be seen that the moral and intellectual
condition of the working classes was based upon their physical
condition—[applause] and the condition of those classes were in a degraded condition to the
upper classes,[sic] and though their condition were raised they would still be in the same
position. With regard to the strikes, one could sympathise more with them than he did.
[ Applause ] When those men conquered, aud they would do so, they would find
that they had not conquered everything, that the next thing they would then
have to consider would be how to improve their position. Continuing the thread of his
observations. he went on to say that there would always be a degrading position so long
they were in an inferior condition to another class. Why was there that contrast?
There was no difference in race, and the grandson of a self-made man might be just as
refined, quite as unenergetic, and quite as stupid as a man with fifty generations of
titled fools at his back. When they thought of that contrast between the condition
the producing and uou-producing classes, they should fiest think that it was
an evil; secondly, that it was caused by artificial regulations and customs that could
be turned into more respectable paths, and by laws, or rather he should say rules,
that could be abolished, leaving them free to work and live as the laws of nature
would let them lira. When they got to that condition of affairs they would have
to accept Socialism as a basis for the new order of things else they would have
to get better basis. Society was divided into two classes, and to be clear they
were those who rendered services to the public, and those who did not. The
former were in inferior position to the latter, although there were various
degrees of inferiority, and an individual of the serviceable class might be so
successful as to become in time of the unserviceable class. Those arrangements of
society appeared to him to be iu alteration, but there were men who must
against it. There were the dishonest tyrant, interested in its continuance on the
one hand, and on the other the cowardly slaves of the tyrant, and both were
contemptible, and such world n» they would have it needed no hell to supplement
it. [Applause.] Some people admitted that it could altered, but others did not
want it to be altered; they lived in it, and others were so hard worked and 
miserable that they had not the time to think it. As the tyrant and slave were
such, he appealed to those of the unserviceable class who were ashamed of themselves
and beginning to understand the crime of living without producing, who would
be serviceable if he could be. The men who worked in order to live were
compelled to do so by their masters, and there was then need of alteration. Clearly it
was only by means superstition and ignorance that that compulsion could be put
into force. Iu some other remarks concerning the strike, he said it was unexampled
one, it was a strike of unskilled workmen. They had been told that such strikes
were impossible, but he thought that one would successful. [Applause.] The strike
was not merely for advantages, but if they were combined they would get even
greater advantages. Ihe strikers would not hava managed to have held together had
it not been for the skilled workmen helping the unskilled. If they had not, the
public would have exalted the employers to the skies; but as it was, public opinion was
all on the side of the strikers, and he could not see why that would not always be the
case when the many were compelled to work for the few. [Applause.] Not only could it
be the case, but, in the long run, it must be the case. Most workmen were 
conscions of the inferiority of their class, but they would never be fully conscious
of the extent to which they suffered from their enforced inlerioritv. The
lecturer then passed on and dealt at great length with the question of monopoly, the
various phases of which he ably explained, and which, he said, was the drawback
the acquisition of that equal state of things which it was so desirable on the part of the
Socialists to bring about. He drew a picture of this, showing that in the first
place the country must produce the tools and raw material, which, together with
body and mental labour, would bring about the necessary state of things. The
materials and tools would be the property of the whole community, and would used
by everyone in it, who would then be equal. and each work for his own livelihood.
That was the ideal society thought of by men whom he called reasonable, but who had
been called very different names and everything that was bad; in short
Socialists— [laughter. "hear, hear,” and applause]—who might even be prosecuted
by malicious persons. In contrast with that he drew another picture, in imagination, of the
present state of society, showing how greatly it was in need alteration, which, if
it went on as it did, must inevitably lead to revolution. The slaves to the privileged
class were not rewarded for their labour; that is, they were given just as little
as they would take without revolting. That was included in the important question
of wages. The failing, tottering system of the present society mn«t inevitably
lead to ruin, and it was necessary that it should, to bring about better times.
It was necessary to abolish monopoly, and reconstruct all society on a new basis, and
abolish all privileges for any class: and that would lead to all the other steps
that would make the world a garden to us and make us friends one with another.
[Loud applause.] 

Questions were then put the lecturer by various persons among
the audiene, which were answered by Mr. Morris in an able manner, thoroughly 
pleasing to his hearers, who were mostly in accord with the sentiments professed. After some
discussion having taken place, the meeting broke up with the customary vote
of thanks. 
