AN ADDRESS TO WORKING MEN. 

A placard which is being largely posted in
London may be read with interest in the North. It is headed "Unjust
War," it is adressed to the working men of Englandl, and it
commences thus:- 

"Friends and fellow-citizens;- there is daeger of war; bestir yourselves
to face that danger. If you go to sleep, saying we do not underetand it,
and the danger is far away you may wake and find the evil fallen on
you, for even now it is at the door. Take heed in time and consider
it well, for a hard matter it will be for most of us to bear war taxes,
war prices, war losses of wealth and work, and friends and kindred; we
shall pay heavily, and you, friends of the working classes, will pay
the heaviest. And who are they who flaunt in our faces the banner
inscribed on one side 'English Interests,' and on the other 'Russian
Misdeeds?' Who are they that are leading us into war? Let us look at
these saviours of England's honour, these champions of Poland, these
scourgers of Russia's iniqities! Do you know them? Greedy gamblers on
the Stock Exchange, idle officers of the army and navy (poor fellows!),
worn-out mockers of the clubs, desperate purveyors of exciting war
news for the comfortable breakfast tables of those who have nothing
to lose by war; and lastly, in the place of honour, the Tory Rump, that
we fools, weary of peace, reason, and justice, chose at the last 
election to represent us; and above all their captain, the ancient
place-hunter, who, having at last climbed into an earl's chair, grins
down thence into the anxious face of England, while his empty heart and
shifty head is compassing the stroke that will bring on-our destruction 
perhaps, our confusion certainly. O shame and double shame if we march
under such leadership as this in an unjust war against a people who are
not our enemies, against Euroope, against freedom, against nature,
against the hope of the world. Working men of England, one word of warning
yet. I doubt if you know the bitterness of hatred against freedom and
progress that lies at the hearts of a certain part of the richer classes
in this country; their newspapers veil it in a kind of decent language,
but if you were to hear them talking among themselves, as I have often,
I know not whether scorn or anger wvould prevail in you at their folly
and insolence. These men cannot speak of your order, of its aims, of its
leaders, withont a sneer or an insult. These men, if they had tho power
(may England perish rather!) would thwart your just aspirations, would
silence you, wonld deliver you bound hand and foot for ever to
irresponsible capital. And these men, I say it deliberately, are the
heart and soul of the party that is driving us to an unjust war. They can
harm us but little now; but if war comes, unjust war, with all its 
confusion and anger, who shall say what their power may be, what step
backward we may take. Fellow-citizens, look to it, cast aside sloth,
and I do not believe that in the face of your strenuous opposition, the
opposition of those men who war most concerns, any English
Government will be so mad as to wrap England and Europe in an unjust war.

"A LOVER OF JUSTICE."

 Northern Echo - Friday 11 May 1877 

 
