 Justice - Saturday 02 February 1884 p. 7

MR. WM. MORRIS AT LEICESTER. On Wednesday, the 23rd, Mr. Morris delivered an
address on Art and Socialism," at the Secularist Hall, Leicester, Mr. Wright,
the President of the Secular Society, occupying the chair. The address was
well received by a full audience, which in the main was middle-class. All the
more definitely socialistic parts were heartily applauded by a portion of the
audience. The prevailing idea throughout the address was that popular art, or
the pleasure of life, is neglected in modern civilisation, and that refinement
is injured by the loss on the one hand, while on the other labour is deprived
of all attractiveness that this condition of want of art is essential to the
present system of manufacturing for profit, and that true refinement and
pleasure in work can only be attained by a social revolution which should
abolish all classes. The lecturer ended with a direct appeal to support the
Democratic Federation as the only body in England which puts forward
constructive socialism as its programme. The Chairman invited discussions, and
a few questions were put as to what means the Democratic Federation would use
for bringing about the change: whether it would not be necessary to educate
people before agitation was begun ; and who was to do the dirty work of the
world under a socialised state of society ? One of the audience, a working
man, said that he feared if the workman tried to make his work light his
employer would soon make it heavy for him and prevent his taking any pleasure
in it. The chairman moved a vote of thanks, which was seconded by Mr. Hopps,
who, however, treated the lecture as a literary feat, and did not agree with
its conclusions. A gentleman. who stood up to support the vote, repudiated
with some indignation the idea that the lecturer was not fully in earnest. The
lecturer, in replying to the vote of thanks, complained of being treated as
merely a poet, and said that he should consider that he insulted an audience
by speakingto them merely to tickle their ears, that he intended to give
expression to practical views on Socialism, which he looked upon as a cause to
be supported with his whole heart.
