

ENGLAND AND THE TURKS

Sir,

<p>I CANNOT help noting that a rumour is about in the air
that England is going to war; and from the depths of my
astonishment I ask, On behalf of whom? Against whom?
And for what end? Some three weeks ago, if such a rumour
had arisen, my questions would, I imagine, have been answered
in this way: “The English nation has been roused
to a sense of justice (for at heart they are a generous people)
by a story of horrors that no man has been able to gainsay;
so they are going to war against the Turkish Government
on behalf of certain subject peoples, whom the Turks conquered
long ago but have never assimilated, and whom
now, in their decrepitude, insolvency and terror, they have
been torturing and oppressing in the vilest manner, while
they claim to be considered and treated as a civilized Government
and a part of the comity of Europe. The end and
aim of the war is to force the Turkish Government (who, to
speak the downright truth, are a gang of thieves and murderers)
to give these subject peoples, who are quite orderly
and industrious, some chance for existence; to force the
Turkish Government to agree to give these peoples some
security for life, limb and property, and to take order that
they shall carry out their agreement (by occupying their
territory or otherwise). This is the end and aim of the war;
and we and all Europe think it a just and honourable aim,
and that we are the right people to see it carried through;
for we, a peaceful people, not liars (except in trade), we
have nothing to gain by helping these luckless folks to lives
and, though we are only their neighbours, in the sense that
the Samaritan was to him who fell among thieves, yet we
are in a kind of way responsible for their usage, for we have
before this waged a great war to keep the Turks, their
jailors, alive, thinking that we could make them a respectable
and even a progressive people—so sanguine, and
to say the truth, such fools we were! However, except that
we are still paying for it out of pocket, all that is past; we
meant no harm then, and now we mean good and will do it.”</p>

<p>If I had fallen asleep three weeks ago, and woke up
yesterday, I should have expected some such answer to my
questions of, For whom? Against Whom? and Why?
And I, a mere sentimentalist, should have rejoiced in such a
war, and thought it wholly good: the people to be helped
worthy of helping, the enemy thieves and murderers, all
Europe our friends, no mouth to gainsay us but the mouths
of thieves and murderers. Yes, I should have thought I had
lived for something at last: to have seen all England just,
and in earnest, the Tories converted or silenced and our
country honoured throughout all the world. In very truth
all this seemed on the point of happening three weeks ago,
though without the terrible expense of a war; but, alas,
though I have not slept, I have awakened, and find the
shoe quite on the other foot. The Tories are not converted;
England is pretty much mocked throughout all the world:
I must sorrowfully say, justly mocked, if, as I fear, we were
not in earnest when we held all those meetings, and passed
all those resolutions full of just anger, as it seemed. I say,
not in earnest, because, to put all conventionalities aside,
we know well that, in matters of peace or war, no Government
durst go against the expressed will of the English
people, when it has a will and can find time to express it;
and, on the other hand, again setting aside conventionalities
of ‘deliberation,’ ‘calm,’ ‘statesmanship,’ and the like, we
know well that our Tory Government has determined to
disregard, as utterly as if it had not happened, the seeming
enthusiasm of repentance which the dreadful facts stated
by your Correspondent and Mr Schuyler, and confirmed
by Mr Baring, seemed to awake, and which Mr Gladstone's
noble and generous rhetoric, and Mr Freeman's manly and
closely reasoned letters, fanned into a seeming fire. We
know, to speak plainly, that the new-made ‘brave’ earl, to
whom nothing is difficult, has at all events found it easy to
see through a ladder, and is determined to drag us into a
shameful and unjust war—how shameful and unjust no
words can say. I say it would be impossible for even that
clever trickster to do this, not only if united England were
in earnest to gainsay him, but even if a large minority were
but half in earnest and spoke, and said ‘No.’ And now, not
even the wretched packed Parliament we have got is sitting.
The cry for that was not believed; the members are too
busy shooting in the country, and the nation is dumb, if it
were not for the 2,000 working men who met last Sunday
at Clerkenwell, and who took it for granted, as everybody
I come across does, that the crossing of the Turkish
boundaries by Russian troops would be followed at a
greater or less time by England's declaration of war against
Russia.  And do you suppose the Turks do not take the
same thing for granted?</p>

<p>I appeal to the Liberal party, and ask if it is not worth
while their making some efforts to avoid this shame. I
appeal to the working men, and pray them to look to it that,
if this shame falls upon them they will certainly remember
it and be burdened by it when the day clears for them, and
they attain all, and more than all they how are striving for:
to the organizers of both these bodies I specially appeal, to
set their hands to the work before it is too late, to drop all
other[s] watch-words that this at least may be heard: No
war on behalf of Turkey; no war on behalf of the thieves
and murderers! I appeal to all men of sense and feeling of
all parties, and bid them think what war means, and to
think if only perhaps this were an unjust war! What, then,
could come of it but shame in defeat and shame in victory,
and in the end ignominious undoing of all that the war
should seem to do. I who am writing this am one of a large
class of men—quiet men, who usually go about their own
business, heeding public matters less than they ought, and
afraid to speak in such a huge concourse as the English
nation, however much they may feel, but who are now stung
into bitterness by thinking how helpless they are in a public
matter that touches them so closely. To these also I appeal
to break silence at last, if they in any wise can, and to be as
little hopeless as may be, for that all may perhaps help, and
perhaps they as much as people more busy in such things;
for the old proverb is true now as ever: ‘Like people, like
priest.’ If this monstrous shame and disaster—if this curse—has
to fall upon us, we cannot make Lord Beaconsfield.
or Lord Derby, the Tory party or the House of Commons,
our scapegoats; we must, our very selves, bear the curse,
and make the best of it, for we put these men where they sit
over us, and do their own will, such as it is; and we can put
them down again if we choose. And, meanwhile, till that
happy day comes round, I say again that I firmly believe
that a large minority, or even not so very large a minority
of the English people, expressing their earnest will, would
be enough to prevent any war; for, surely, even the Earl of
Beaconsfield must hesitate before signing the death-warrant
of so many men, if he has an excuse given him for it,
since they say he is human, though, indeed, I scarce believe
it. Any war could be stayed, much more, surely, such a
cynically unjust and shameful one as this would be: nay,
such a monstrously laughable one, if the world could laugh
for shame and grief. This is the last word. I call on all those
who attended those many-thronged and enthusiastic meetings
throughout the country the other day to meet again;
let their organizers see to it. For I assure them that not the
less because they have forgotten it were those babies murdered
in Bulgaria—there were more, I believe, slain in
Scio a while ago, but that is more utterly forgotten than
these last—not the less were the poor souls robbed to their
very shirts, it seems; not the less because they no longer
heed it are people dying hundreds a day of cold and hunger
out there: let those who attended those meetings, now they
have rested, once more bring their imaginations to bear
upon it all, and to take note that we have refused to help
these poor people, that we have refused to take order that
the like desolation shall not happen again, and have forced
the Russians to do our share and their own of the business—for
which we propose to go to war with them, after all we
have said in our thronged and enthusiastic meetings! Can
history show a greater absurdity than this or greater fools
than the English people will be if they do not make it clear
to the Ministry and the Porte that they will wage no war on
behalf of the Turks, no war on behalf of thieves and murderers?</p>

<p>I beg with humility to be allowed to inscribe myself, in
the company of Mr Gladstone and Mr Freeman, and all
that I esteem, as an hysterical sentimentalist; and I am, Sir,</p>

<p>Your obedient servant,
WILLIAM MORRIS
Author of <em>The Earthly Paradise.</em></p>

pp 483 - 487
