See Commonweal April 7 1888 for Morris's own comments
on talks in Scotland and the press ('Socialism militant in Scotland')

1. Kilmarnock 21 March 

[Can't find any press mention of Kilmarnock talk]


2. Leith - but cf big open-air talk after!

 Inverness Courier - Tuesday 27 March 1888 

Under the auspices of the Scottish Land and Labour League, a lecture was
announced to be delivered on "Monopolies" by Mr Wdliam Morris, poet and
Socialist, in the Assembly Rooms, Leith, on Friday night. At eight o’clock,
the hour fixed for the lecture, the audience consisted of two gentlemen and
one lady, and was augmented in a few’ minutes by two other gentlemen. After
waiting for about a quarter of hour, a gentleman intimated that the lecture
would not be delivered, and that those who had paid for admission would
receive back their money at the door. 

3. West Calder - this is not true!

 The Scotsman - Monday 26 March 1888 

A Socialist lecture on "Monopolies," by Mr Morris, of London, was largely
advertised in West Calder last week. The night of the meeting, the hour, and the lecturer arrived, but there was no audience.

 The Scotsman - Wednesday 28 March 1888 
---------------
MR WILLIAM MORRIS AND WEST CALDER

16 Tantallon Place, Edingburgh, March 26 1888

SIR,- I see that it is stated in your issue of to-day that there was no
audience for a lecture which I was advertised to give at West Calder last
Saturday. Allow me to correct this statement, which is untrue: there was an
audience of over sixty persons, almost all of whom belonged to the working
classes. Considering that Saturday night is inconvenient for the lecture-going
of the working classes, I think this was not a bad attendance for a small
place like West Calder. I must add that the audience was as attentive,
intelligent, and sympathetic, as a lecturer could desire.- I am, &amp;c.

WILLIAM MORRIS

[Our correspondent was asked for an explanation of this letter. He says:= "I
went down to the hall at the advertised hour and found nobody there but the
lecturer and his friends. They waited for a quarter of an hour, and then
commenced lecturing at the street corners. They also sent a boy through the
place with a bell. By this means they were enable to attract an audience of 43
- not 60 as Mr Morris states. The meeting was held about an hour late. Mr
  Morris, however, did not seem to please his audience, as they gradually
  disappeared, until very few were left at the finish. I have seen an audience
  of over 600 in West Calder on a Saturday night."]
---------------------------

3. Glasgow (Sunday 25)

 Glasgow Herald - Monday 26 March 1888 

Mr William Morris, london, lectured in the Waterloo Rooms last night on
" Art and Industry in the Fourteenth Century." Mr George McLean presided.
The lecturer, who was well received, traced the grewth of the feudal
system from the customs of the tribes of Europe, the passing of the serfs
into tenants, and the growth of the power of the towns by the wringing
of status from the necessities of the barons. The towns, he said, grew from
mere agricultural districts into bodies governed by an exclusive municipal
aristocracy, and this was gradually overthrown by the craft guilds and a
complete mediæval free town was formed, in which the communal spirit
was alive. The rules of the guilds aimed at the exclusion of capitalisn. This
system fell because it had reached the limits of expansion, and because of
its exclusiveness, before the advance of commercialism. The spirit would
receive new expression from an inclusive comnmunism. Mr Morris h was
accorded a vote of thanks for his lecture. 


4. Edinburgh (Monday 26)

 Edinburgh Evening News - Tuesday 27 March 1888 

A PROPHETIC SOCIALIST IN EDINBURGH. 

Last night, Mr William Morris, "poet and Socialist," delivered a lecture on
"The Society of the Future," in the Trades Hall, Edinburgh.  About eighty
persons were present. The Rev. John Glasse, who occupied the chair,
referred to the small attendance at the meeting, and said that when people who
prided themselves  upon their culture and insight were conspicuous by their
absence, it was a very strong argument why they should go on with their
Socialist movement in order that they should deliver these people from the
dominion of such gross stupidity and ignorance. Mr Morris, in the course of
his lecture, said that if the present civilisation were to remain where it was
he declared himself an enemy of civilisation. His idea of the new society
would not be satisfied ubtil the new society destroyed that civilisation. He
demanded a free, unfettered animal life, and the utter extinction of
licentiousness. The great club was a fair representation of modern luxury, and
was by far the most contemptible product of luxury which existed. In the new
society political society would come to an end, and the relations between man
and man would longer be that of status and property. In the new condition of
things private property would not exist as a right, because there should be
such an abundance of things that there should be no exchange necessary. Each
man would have to attend upon himself to a great extent, and a great many of
the present useless employments would go to the wall. Machinery in those days
would probably to a great extent have served its purpose, and the more
important would be retained, while the less important would have fallen into
disuse. The huge manufacturing districts would be broken up, and the
commercial towns would come to an end, and perhaps some pleasant fields would
mark the spot of that presposterous place called London. As to occupations
they should clearly not be able to have the same division of labour as they
had now. For example, vicarious servantism - letter-carrying, boot-blackening,
hairdressing, and the like — would have come to an end. They should either
have to make these occupations agreeable to themselves in some mood or other,
or they should have to let them lapse altogether. Moreover, education, which
was at present entirely commercial and political, would be changed, and
directed into a purer channel. The society of the future would not know the
meaning the words "rich" and "poor," or of the rights of property, or law or
legality, or nationality, and in it equality of condition was a matter of
course.—A discussion followed.

 Aberdeen Free Press - Wednesday 28 March 1888

The Society of the Future

Lecturing in Edinburgh on Monday night on “The Society the Future,” Mr William
Morris, poet and Socialist, laid down at the outset the importance of the
realisation af a free and full life, and passing over the period of
transition, he went on to sketch at length the various conditions of existence
in the new society which would emerge. He said that what should call political
society would have to come to an end. The relations between man and man would
be no longer that of status and property. What would be thought of would not
be the relation of man to a thing, but man to another man. As to occupations,
they should clearly not be able have the same division of labour they had now.
For example, vicarious servantism–letter-carrying, boot-blackening,
hairdressing, and the like —would have come to end. They should either have to
make these occupations agreeable to themselves in some mood or other, or they
should have to let them lapse altogether. In brief, he said, the society of
the future would not know the meaning of the words “rich” and “poor.” or of
the rights of property, law legality, or nationality, and in it equality of
condition was a matter of course.



5. Dundee (Tuesday 27)


 Dundee Courier - Wednesday 28 March 1888

LECTURE BY MR WM. MORRIS, POET AND SOCIALIST. 

Last night Mr William Morris, "poet and Socialist," delivered a lecture on
Socialism in Buchan's Hall, Dundee.  Mr. James Aimer presided, and there was a
fair attendance. 

Mr Morris, wbo was received with hearty applause, said that in making their
claims the Socialists were satisfied in demanding what he thought necessary
for the new society.  They wanted equality and the abolishment of monopoly. It
was their business to use all the means in their hands to remedy all evils.
The new society would give to all men more leisure and pleasure, and crime
would br rarer, because there would not the same temptation to crime. He
demanded that the words " poor and rich" should have less of their old
meaning, and that people should live full, free life. It must be the business
of society to make the surroundings eaeh man more pleasureable. Speaking on
the subject of present civilisation, he said that if civilisation were to
remain where it was he declared himself an enemy of civilisation. His idea of the
new society would not be satisfied unless the new society destroyed that
civilisation. In the new condition of things private property would not exist
as a right, because there should be such an abundance of the property that
there should be no exchange necessary. Each man would have to attend upon
himself to a great extent, and a great many of the present employments would
go to the wall. Machinery in those days would probably to a great extent have
served its purpose, and the more important would be retained, while the less
important would have fallen into disuse. The huge manufacturing districts
would be broken up, and the commercial towns would come to end. In this
connection he controverted the view expressed by Lord Rosebery and Mr. Firth,
M.P. As regarded education, which was at present entirely commercial and
political, it would be changed, and directed into a purer channel. At the
close of the lecture considerable of questions, chiefly of a very pertinent
character, were put to Mr Morris. One of these was whether the Socialists were
prepared to accomplish their object by means of bloody revolution. Mr Morris
replied that they were prepared seek the attainment the end for which they
were working by adopting the same means other political parties did, but the
experiments made by Robert Owen would never solve the problem which they were
attempting. Questioned as to the Socialists' views in regard to the
maintenance of large armies he said that Socialism meant the extinction of
nationalities, but that so long as there were nationalities every citizen
would be liable to serve in the army. In answer to other questions, he said
the distinction between tho idea of Lord Rosebery and Mr Firth in regard to
property and that of the Socialists was that the latter claimed collective
ownership of the property which could only be used for the reproduction of
wealth, which was the very reverse of such a principle as the " Great Divide."
A gentleman asked whether what the Socialists sought to attain was not already
accomplished by means of the subdivision of labour and the keen competition
which at present prevailed, but Mr Morris replied that Socialists desired to
get rid of the competition of the present day, and pointed out that a
bookkeeper in a factory or merchant were not producers. A gentleman said he
did not see how Mr Morris could advance Socialism while he himself kept a
factory and paid his men by piecework, which was a method of payment
particularly condemned by Socialists, and remarked that former revolutions had
generally been accomplished by individual men making victims of themselves for
the sake of the cause—(laughter)—and suggested that Mr Morris might also adopt
this course.  Mr Morris, after remarking that he did not think it was all fair
to bring a man's own circumstances against himself, said that even supposing
he was a bad employer of labour, must follow the ordinary run of business, or
he should have to give his business up. He should like become a victim, but
did not see how he could do so. He might give his workmen a share in his
business, but that would only be making them capitalists as well as himself. A
member of the audience asked if it was consistent for a man to preach what he
himself did not practise, but the Chairman said that that was not a practical
question?  Another question was put as to whether the object of the Socialists
in this country was to work until they got a majority, and then coerce the
minority into acceptance of their views. Mr Morris replied that the majority
governed the minority at present, and thought it was only right that the
majority should do so. There was always a certain amount of compulsion in the
carrying nut of all questions. In answer to other questions, he said that as
an organisation he did not value the Church one whit. (Laughter.) In
acknowledging a vote of thanks, Mr Morris said that the present system was
failiug, and could not be sustained by artificial means; and, as no body was
seeking to put forward any new system except the Socialists, he hoped that his
audience would assist towards securing the adoption of that system for which
Socialists were contending. (Applause.)


6. Aberdeen


Aberdeen
[2 different reports- shorter one has more of the questions]

 Aberdeen Press and Journal - Thursday 29 March 1888 p. 6

MR WILLIAM MORRIS ON MONOPOLY. 

Last night Mr William Morris, the poet, author of "The Earthly Paradise," &c.,
delivered a lecture under the auspices of the Aberdeen Branch of the Land and
Labour League, within the Lecture Hall, Café, on the subject of "Monopoly."
Rev. Alexander Webster, Unitarian Church, presided, and introduced the
lecturer. At the outset, in dealing with his subject, Mr Morris brushed away
the usual limited sense of the word Monopoly, and applied it in dealing with
the wide subject of the position of the working classes generally at the
present day, relatively to the condition of other classes of whom the
community is composed. Starting with the general proposition that the workers
are in an inferior position to the non-workers, he proceeded to enumerate at
length and in detail the facts which illustrated that position. The first of
these was that the workers ate inferior food, and were clothed in inferior
clothes, to those of the non-workers, and in making that proposition he
asserted that a great part of the population of these islands the died
annually of not having enough to eat. The second point was that the houses of
the workers were inferior to those of the non-workers, and in these respects
he had mentioned he asserted that as to material things the contrast of
workers and non-workers was horrible. Then apart from material things, the
education of the worker was inferior to that of the non~worker while his
holidays were fewer, and if he took a holiday he had to take it in a certain
sense against his conscience, because he always took it against his purse.
Then with regard to public amusements, there was a contrast between those that
were thought desirable for the upper classes and that were thought good enough
for the lower classes, and in this connection he mentioned that he had been a
member of a well-meaning society, who thought that a very low standard of art
was sufficient for the workers. Then there was a general impression that
working men stood on a lower level as to the kind of language they used, and
that they understood. He had been told that if he wanted to make the working
classes understand he must not address them in a literary style. At first
sight, it looked as if the workers had got hold of the right end of the stick,
because many of their leading articles, for example, were a wretched jargon
which he could not call language. Seriously, however, when his friends told
him, that intelligent working men did not understand plain English, all he
could say was that he declined to descend to that level at all. He thought
himself bound to address working men not as working men, but as men.
(Applause.) When they came to think of the contrast between the producing and
non-producing classes they would be forced to admit, first, that it was an
evil, and, second, that it was caused by artificial regulations; and wvhen
they had come to these two conclusions they would have to accept Socialism as
the basis for a new order of things, or would have to find some better basis
than Socialism. They would not he able to accept the present basis for
improvement unless they were prepared to say they would not seek a remedy for
an evil which they knew could be remedied. In order to support what he had
said the lecturer proceeded to re-state his position, which in brief was that
society was divided into two classes: those who rendered services to the
public, and these who did not.  Those who rendsered services to the public
were in an inferior position to those who did not, although there were various
degrees of inferiority among them; the most useful in the comamunity, those
who provided food, were the worst paid. These points were elaborated in
considerable detail, and it was argued that all people admitted that such a
state of things could be remedied, only there were some people who were afraid
of its being remedied, because they thought, possibly, if it should be
remedied they would lose their livelihood, as they lived by that system, and
there were others who were so hard worked and so miserable that they had no
time to think and no heart to hops. The remedy for the state of matters which
existed–for that monopoly which demanded payment for imaginary services–was,
he asserted, in the hands of the workers; and the purpese of the Socialist
propaganda was that the change should be brought about or guided by the
intelligence of the workers, and that it should not be left to the blind
forces of hunger, misery, and despair. He should be disingennous if he said he
thought the abolition of monopoly would come about peacefully. There would be,
he indicated, a considerable struggle, and one of the elements of that
struggle would be the ignorance of one part of the working classes. Their end,
however, was to sweep away all artificial restrictions on free labour. Those
who set  that object before them would differ as to the means by which it was
to be done; but if it meant the happiness of the human race, it was worth
paying any price to get that change. No programme was worth acceptance of the
working classes that stepped short of the abolition of private property in the
means of production–that was, the land and all that was on it tbat was used
for the production of wealth. That programnme, although it might seem short
and simple, was enough. It would give them a new world, in which all would
work and none would want; in which no man would compel his neighbour to live a
better life than nature would have him, in which in short, the earth should be
their garden, nature their servant, and all men their friends. (Applause.) 

At the close of the
lecture, questions were invited, and after a prolonged pause a gentleman
asked in the event of goods becoming common universally, how would he
pay for the raw material, such as timber from Canada, copper from
Texas, &c. In reply, Mr Morris said that would be done simply by
exchange. In reply to Mr John Laird, Mr Morris said his remedy for
the present stats of matters was the abolition of the classes who not
only did not work, hut wasted work. The method by which it wae
to he carried out was simply to take away from this class its
monopoly of the means of production. There was a difficulty in
dealing with the present system. That difficulty was the first step,
but he admitted it was a greet one. In reply to other questions,
he said the one point in their charter was the abolition of private
property in the means of production and that he declined to give
compensation for that property, which was simply the ownership
of society. Hle was against turning foreign labour out of the country.
Asked what was to come of Her Majesty the Queen, he said that
people came to Socialism through Radicalism. He had heard that denied,
but as a matter of fact it was the case, and he wished all people
who bad not gone so far as that to be Republicans, and by that time
they should not trouble themselves about that curious institution called
monarchy. (Applause.) As to whether poverty would he restricted by
Socialism, lMr Morris, in reply to another question said be did not see
how it could to fail to be, though there would be in the first years of 
Socialism a certain proportion of lazy people. That disease, however,
would ultimately pass away. No further questions were asked, and the
proceedings, which lasted two hours, terminated. 



  Aberdeen Free Press - Thursday 29 March 1888 p. 6

WILLIAM MORRIS IN ABERDEEN. 
ADDRESS ON “MONOPOLY.” 

Last night, under the auspices of the Aberdeen branch of the Scottish Land and
Labour League, Mr William Morris, London, addressed a meeting in the Lecture
Hall, Café Buildings, on the subject of "Monopoly.” Admission was by ticket,
and the hall was filled.  Rev. Alex. Webster presided. The Chairman, in
introducing the lecturer, said their most distinguished citizen, whoever he
might be, might have honoured himself by taking the place he (the chairman) as
a much humbler individual had been called upon to occupy that night; and that
such a distinguished man of letters as Morris should have been welcomed in
Aberdeen with academic honours. He was sure that the time was not far distant
when Socialism would be felt to be a power in Aberdeen. 

Mr William Morris, who was received with cheers, said possibly they might
think the word "Monopoly" was a somewhat dry subject, and that it might cover
nothing except a certain rather limited economical question that did not
affect very particularly the lives of any extended class of the community, but
he thought that really if they did that that impression would arise from their
not quite understanding how far the word "Monopoly" reached. It reached so far
that he had to ask them in considering the subject of monopoly first of all to
consider such a very wide subject as the position of the working classes
generally at the present day. He did not ask them to dwell on the progress
which they might or might not have made within the last 50 or the last 500
years.  He meant he did not want them to consider what their relative progress
was, but what their relative condition was compared with any of the other
classes of whom the community was composed. The contrast between the
advancement of the working classes and the upper and middle classes was
sufficiently startling to render exaggeration unnecessary. Labour was the
source of all wealth, and when they considered this they must come to the
conclusion that the fact that the workers’standard of livelihood was lower
than that of the non-workers, was sufficiently startling without going into
the matter any further. Startling as it was, it was true that all of them
needed their imaginations quickened by looking at the matter more in detail.
In the first place, they moat admit that the workers ate inferior food, and
were clad in inferior clothes, compared with the nonworkers. This was true of
the whole class of workers. The great portion of it was so ill-fed that, not
only had they to live on coarser and nastier food than non-producers, but had
not even enough of these coarse and nasty victuals to sustain their strength
duly. To put it as it was usually put, they suffered from the disease and the
early death that came of starvation. In other words, although they did not
necessarily die in a few days of starvation, a great part of the population of
these islands did really die of starvation, that was to say, not having enough
to eat. This lower portion of the working class was so ill-clad that the
foulness of their clothes was useful as making an extra defence against the
weather. As to the shelter, the housing of the workers, he said many of the
houses or apartments were not fit for human beings to live in, so crowded were
they. One thing that had struck him was the noise and unrest of the quarters
in which the working classes lived, in contrast to the dignified calm of the
quarters occupied those who could pay for such blessings. As to the material
needs–food, clothes, and houses,—the contrast between the workers and the
non-workers was horrible. But they could not let the matter rest there. As
they went further, they found there was a contrast in other matters.  The
education of the working classes was not what it should be. If professional
men did a little more than the due amount of grinding work, they were always
urged not overdo themselves, and consider their precious lives, and the
necessity of taking a little rest. If the persons who urged this found some
artisan with whom they had business relations, or with whom they had no
business relations, who was in need of a holiday, their attitude was
different. Another difficult subject was that relating to public amusements.
Thera was a great contrast between the amusements that were thought desirable
for the upper and those that were thought good enough tor the lower classes.
Some people thought a low style of language ought to adopted addressing the
lower classes. He had been told that if he wanted the working classes to
understand, he must not write to them in literary style; but he would say that
if the English workmen did not understand plain language, and wanted what was
called "telegraphy," all he could say was he declined to descend to that
level.  He felt bound to address the workmen, not as workmen but as
men–(applause). The upshot of it all came to this, that the working classes
were relatively to the upper and middle classes in a degraded condition, and
that their condition couid be much raised from what it was now. If their wages
were doubled, that would raise their position, but, notwithstanding, they
would still be in a degraded position as long as they were in a position of
inferiority to another class. He asked them to consider what all this meant,
and they would surely, after due consideration, come to the conclusion that
that must have to do with the way labour was organised amongst us. Clearly it
was not a matter of race. The races on these islands were so broken up that it
was difficult for a man to say from what blood he came. Nor would it do to say
it was a matter of individual talent or average talent. It was absurd to say
that the whole of the working classes were composed of men who individually
did not rise above a low average of intellect, and that the whole of the rich
class were individuals who were above that average. He did not think anyone
would be found to support such a proposition as that who was met most
obviously below even that low standard—(laughter). When they thought of the
contrast between the producing and the non-producing class they would be
forced to admit, first of all, that it was an evil; and secondly, that it was
caused artificially. Then they would have to accept Socialism as the basis for
a new order of things or some better basis; but they would not be able to
accept the present basis of society as a basis for improvement unless they
were prepared to say that they would not seek a remedy for an evil they knew
could be remedied. Society to-day was divided into two classes—those who
rendered service to the public and those who did not. Those who rendered
services to the public were in an inferior position to those who did not, and
this ought not to be the case. The most useful persons in the community were
the worst paid, and clearly they ought to be best paid.  They were not
deprived of hope, and that hope was that if they were successful they might
become unserviceable —(laughter). If they had done any good to the State they
might be put into position in which the whole of their lives was an injury to
the State. In that case they would be rewarded by a position of ease, comfort,
and respect, and might leave that position as a precious inheritance to their
children. What the unserviceable class said was pretty much to the effect that
if they exercised thrift and industry they would rewarded by being put in a
position in which they would be able to throw thrift and industry to the
winds. It was clear that this doctrine would not be preached by the
unserviceable class if it were widely practised, because the result would be
that the serviceable class would tend to grow less and less, and at last there
would be nobody to do the work of the world and they should be undone. The
people who thought about this subject admitted that it could remedied. Some
people were afraid of it being remedied as it was possible they would lose
their livelihood, and there were others so hard worked and miserable that they
had not time to think and no heart to hope. In order that a remedy might be
attained, appealed to those of the unserviceable class who were ashamed of
their position, who were learning to understand the crime of living without
producing, and, on the other hand, to those of the serviceable class who were
able to think of their position and were intelligently discontented. Why
should the many allow the few to compel them to do what nature did not compel
them to do? They all knew that it was only by means of superstition and
ignorance and a sort of cowardice superadded that this matter could go on like
this, apd that the few could compel the many to work to their disadvantage,
because they saw that the existence of a superior class living on an inferior
class implied that there was a constant struggle going on between these two
classes. When the inferior class had really learned what its aim ought to be,
then they would find the pursuit of that aim to be irresistable. It was those
of the middle class who knew both the upper and the lower classes, and really
understood what the loss was which resulted from the position of the upper and
lower classes. Before they set out to seek a remedy, they must add to that
remedy of their position a knowledge of the means whereby they were kept in
that position; and when they learned that then the change would come. The
working classes could live without the upper classes; the upper classes could
not live without the working classes. By getting rid of monopoly the workers
would be free and able to live within the limits nature prescribed to them.
Monopoly was described as selling wares at enhanced prices without the seller
having any additional value corresponding to that advancement. It might be put
as the habit of receiving reward for services never performed and never
intended to be performed. Monopoly was their master, and they did not know it.
What was the article the monopolist had to sell? It was in the shortest
possible word, Life. He had to sell them the leave to labour, and he would not
do that unless they paid him something for it.  These monopolists did not
merely lay toll on a few matters of luxury or curiosity which they could
easily do without, but upon the vary means of production—that was to say, the
means of livelihood. They must admit that everyone must labour who would live,
unless they were able to get somebody to do his service for them, being a sort
of pensioner; but most people could not be pensioners on others, and therefore
they had to labour to supply their wants. The worker was placed at a
considerable disadvantage doing this owing to the action of the monopolists.
The army, the the police, the judges, the lawyers, &amp;c., were banded
together to sustain the power of monopoly. The land was being used no longer
for its primary use—providing food for man and beast—but as a rent-squeezing
machine. Tbe means of transit were also abused. What monopoly did was to try
to secure the greatest amount of profit. When they fell short in getting what
they considered a due amount of profit, they said the times were bad, although
their stores might be full to overflowing. In order to procure wealth at the
expense of the labourer they had wars and waste and all kinds of stupidities,
among which he included jubilees and silver weddings—(laughter). The worker
was just the helpless machine of commerce. A change must be brought about.
Monopoly capitalists must be swept away before they could have a real society.
It was the workers themselves that must bring about the change; and he said
that the purpose of socialistic propaganda was that that change should,if
possible, be bronght about or should be guided by the conscious intelligence
of the workers, that it should not be left altogether to the blind forces of
hunger, misery, and despair, which the capitalist system was steadily piling
up for its own overthrow. The time was coming when the monopoly of the means
of production would lose its value, and when the employers, in consequence,
would begin to cease to employ. There would be a cut-throat competition for
cheapening the means of production on the one hand, and on the other the
unceasing struggle of the workers to improve their condition. If the workers
had learned to understand their position, they need not fear for the
crisis—(applause). The increase in the productivity of labour, which was
ruining capitalists, would make Socialism possible, and it could not be
disputed that the progress of the cheapening of production would be quickened
prodigiously in the first days of the new social era. Things going on around
them did not give encouragement that things would go on in an unnoticeable and
soft and quiet kind of manner. If the whole class of workers could be
convinced in one day or one year of the necessity of abolishing monopoly, of
course it would pass away like the clouds of night; but certain things had to
be overcome before this state of matters could be arrived at. He asked them to
learn to agree with Socialists in thinking it was necessary to abolish the
present state of monopoly, and combine together for the abolition and
reconstruction of society on the basis of freedom of labour and the abolition
of all privilege. He must also add that no programme was worthy of acceptance
of the working classes that stopped short of the abolition of private property
in the means of production—(applause). Any mere palliative measures would fall
short of the solution of the problem, and were valuable partly as means of
enabling them to tide over the present, and partly as tokens of the discontent
of the workers.  If the socialiut programme were carried out it would give
them a new world in which all would work and none would want, and in which the
earth would be their gwrden, nature their servant, and all men their
friends—(applause). At the close questions were invited, and a number were put
referring to points raised in the lecture. 
